8]<OU_1 66985 gS 




o^ tAe "UntJcct 

Ji <3E4 asfl >jJb*f!*H<rtl f>f 



t/i* 



cf tAe fynitect 



OUP 23-4-4-69 5,000. 

OSMANIA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 



Call No. VU.t/Z)t>Or Action No. 

r^- * . O 

Author \S /^k^vsO^^ ^ L 




This book should be returned on or before the date 
last marked below. 



THE POEMS OF EMILY DICKINSON 



VOLUME I 



THE POEMS OF 



Emily Dickinson 



Including variant readings critically compared 
with all known manuscripts 



Edited ]oy 
THOMAS H. JOHNSON 




THE BELKNAP PRESS 

of HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

Cambridge, Massachusetts 

1955 



Copyright* 1 95 1 > 1 955> by the Presidenymd Fellows of Harvard College 

Copyright, 1914, 1918, 191^, 1924, 1929, 1930, 1932, 1935, 
1937, 1942, by Manka Dickinson Bianchi 

Distributed in Great Britain by 
Geoffrey Cumberlege, Oxford University Press, London 



Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 54-863 1 
Printed in the United States of America 



"If fame belonged to me, 
I could not escape her." 

E.D. toTW.H. 
]une 1862. 



FOREWORD 

This edition of the poetry of Emily Dickinson includes all the seven- 
teen hundred seventy-five poems, together with the variants, that she 
is known to have written. Since the greater part of her manuscripts 
survive, it has been possible to assign to most of the poems a relative 
chronology. The dating of them is conjectural and for the most part 
will always remain so. Dates have been adduced by all scraps of evi- 
dence, associative and direct, including painstaking studies of hand- 
writing and of stationery. 

Emily Dickinson was born to her talent but she felt no dedication to 
her art until she was about twenty-eight years old, in 1858. By 1862 
her creative impulse was at flood tide, and by 1865 the greater part of 
her poetic energies were spent. She continued to write poetry until her 
death in 1886, when she was fifty-five years old, and many of the later 
verses are among her great creations. But after 1870 her poems are rela- 
tively few in number and were often composed for an occasion and for 
the friends to whom they were sent. 

Throughout her life people were of the utmost importance to her, 
but direct contacts exhausted her emotionally to such an extent that 
she shrank from all but the most intimate. Thus her seclusion became 
nearly absolute in the last decade of her life. This is not to say that she 
withdrew from the outside world. On the contrary, she associated 
steadily with the friends of her selection through the medium of letters. 
Her correspondence was voluminous and the letters of her later years 
share a measuiej}JLthejermanence of her poetry. 

But poetry was the art for which her life was set apart and to it all^ 
else was ancillary. So unwilling was she to be diverted from her calling, 
from her own originalities which those capable of evaluating only 
dimly understood, that she made deliberate choice of obscurity in her 
own lifetime. She was right in her assurance that if fame belonged to 
her, she could not in the end escape it. 

T.H.J. 



CONTENTS 

VOLUME I 



PUBLISHER'S PREFACE xi 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS XIII 

CREATING THE POEMS xvn 

THE POET AND THE MUSE 
PRIVATE AUDIENCES 
THE POET AT WORK 

EDITING THE POEMS: 1890-1945 xxxix 

CHARACTERISTICS OF 

THE HANDWRITING XLIX 

NOTES ON THE PRESENT TEXT LX 

SYMBOLS USED TO IDENTIFY MANUSCRIPTS LXV 

SYMBOLS USED TO IDENTIFY PUBLICATION LXVI 

POEMS 1-494 i 



VOLUME II 

POEMS 495-1176 379 

VOLUMEIII 

POEMS 1177-1775 821 

APPENDIXES 1187 

1. BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF RECIPIENTS 

OF POEMS 1189 

2. TABULATION OF RECIPIENTS 1197 

3. TABULATION OF POEMS YEAR BY YEAR I2OO 

4. UNPUBLISHED POEMS I2O2 

5- THE PACKETS BY CHRONOLOGICAL 

ARRANGEMENT I2O2 

6. THE PACKETS: THE TODD NUMBERING 1203 

7- POEMS DUPLICATED IN THE PACKETS I2O5 

8. TITLES OF POEMS SUPPLIED BY EMILY 

DICKINSON , 1206 

9. POEMS PUBLISHED IN EMILY DICKINSON'S 

LIFETIME 1207 

10. CHRONOLOGICAL LISTING OF FIRST 

PUBLICATION ELSEWHERE THAN IN 
COLLECTIONS I2O7 

11. DISTRIBUTION OF MISSING AUTOGRAPHS 1 209 

SUBJECT INDEX 1211 

INDEX OF FIRST LINES 1227 

X 



PUBLISHER'S PREFACE 

Seldom can a publisher of books write with the wholehearted satis- 
faction that is mine a prefatory statement for a new work about to be 
issued. The publication of this edition of the poems of Emily Dickin- 
son is an epoch-making event, the culmination of more than a half- 
century of effort by Dickinson students, and thus a source of pride to 
all concerned. Here in these three volumes are united all the poems 
known to have been written by ED, with all their variants, and with 
the poet's own preferred text of each poem identified. The years spent 
by Thomas H. Johnson on this undertaking have resulted in an out- 
standing work of literary scholarship, indispensable for students of 
American intellectual history and forever to be cherished by lovers 
of poetry. 

Harvard University, through its Press, is proud to publish Mr. John- 
son's definitive edition of The Poems of Emily Dickinson and glad 
to acknowledge its great debts to two of its sons whose generosity has 
made the publication possible: Gilbert H. Montague by his gift to 
Harvard University Library provided funds for the purchase of the 
poet's manuscripts and other papers from the heir to the literary es- 
tate; and the late Waldron Phoenix Belknap, Jr., by his bequest for 
scholarly publishing created The Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press, the imprint under which this edition is now published. In accom- 
plishing the purposes of these two benefactors, the publishers have 
been notably assisted by the unselfish devotion of Mrs. Waldron P. 
Belknap, mother of the founder of The Belknap Press. It is a pleasure 
to record our thanks to her here, in the first pages of one of the great 
publications to bear her son's name. 

The thanks of the publishers are also due to the staff of Harvard 
University Library for unfailing and intelligent collaboration through- 
out an arduous task of editing and publishing. In particular we are 
indebted to William A. Jackson and Keyes D. Metcalf by whose efforts 
the Houghton Library has become a center of Dickinson materials 



XI 



PUBLISHER'S PREFACE 



and Dickinson scholarship, and this present publication has been 
made possible. 

Grateful and general acknowledgment is made hereby, for the 
University, to Little, Brown and Company and Houghton Mifflin 
Company for permission to print in these volumes the Dickinson 
poems and other documents which are under copyright and have been 
published by these firms. The details of our borrowings from the pub- 
lications of these houses are stated elsewhere by Mr. Johnson in his 
presentation of the poems themselves, and formal acknowledgment of 
copyright is made on the verso of the title page. 

It must be stated here that The President and Fellows of Harvard 
College claim the sole ownership of and sole right of possession in all 
the Emily Dickinson manuscripts now in the possession of Mrs. 
Millicent Todd Bingham, and all the literary rights and copyrights 
therein, by virtue of Harvard's purchase agreement in 1950 with 
Alfred Leete Hampson, heir of Emily Dickinson's niece, Mrs. Martha 
Dickinson Bianchi. 

THOMAS J. WILSON 
June 1955 Director, Harvard University Press 



XLl 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I wish to express thanks for the help rendered by those who have 
served this undertaking in an advisory capacity: Mr. Frederick B. 
Adams, Jr., Mr. Edward C. Aswell, Mr. Julian P. Boyd, and Mr. 
Robert E. Spiller. I acknowledge the courtesy of Mrs. Millicent Todd 
Bingham in making available for study and photostating all of the 
large number of manuscripts of Dickinson poetry in her possession. 
She gave of her time, and placed in my hands for study the great num- 
ber of transcripts of the poems that had been made by her mother, 
Mabel Loomis Todd, during the years 1887-1896 when Mrs. Todd 
was undertaking the first editing of the poetry of Emily Dickinson. 
Mrs. Raymond W. Jones gave material aid by the loan of books and 
family papers. Mr. William H. McCarthy permitted me to draw 
freely upon his intimate knowledge of the Dickinson papers. Mr. 
Russell S. Smith placed at my disposal a copy of his unpublished 
thesis "A Dickinson Bibliography" (Brown University, 1948), to- 
gether with an unpublished study of Dickinson's use of the Bible. Mr. 
Michael A. Weinberg spent many scores of hours analyzing the 
stationery. 

I wish to thank the following individuals and institutions for per- 
mission to study and make use of the manuscripts in their possession: 
Dr. J. Dellinger Barney, Mr. Clifton Waller Barrett, Dr. Mary A. 
Bennett, Mrs. Graham B. Elaine, Mr. Francis Bowles, Mrs. John 
Nicholas Brown, Mr. Orton L. Clark, President Charles W. Cole, 
Mr. H. B. Collamore, Miss Elizabeth S. Dickerman, Miss Marion E. 
Dodd, Miss Julia S. L. Dwight, Mrs. William Esty, Mrs. Howard B. 
Field, the Rev. John Fletcher, Mrs. Leon Godchaux, Mrs. William 
L. Hallowell, Mr. Richard Hooker, Mr. M. A. DeWolfe Howe, Mr. 
Parkman Howe, Miss Helen Jackson, Miss Marcelle Lane, Mr. Josiah 
K. Lilly, Mr. Samuel Loveman, Mr. Thomas O. Mabbott, Mr. Julian 
E. Mack, Mrs. William Tyler Mather, Miss Katherine Morse, Mr. A. 
Norcross, Mrs. Hervey C. Parke, Mrs. Frederick J. Pohl, Miss Edith 



xni 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

L. Pinnick, Mrs. Fairfield Porter, Mrs. J. Frederic Scull, Mrs. Doheny 
H. Sessions, Mrs. Susan H. Skillings, Mrs. Grant Squires, and Mrs. 
Elizabeth S. Walcott: 

The American Antiquarian Society; The Boston Public Library; 
Colby College Library; The Converse Memorial Library, and the 
Edward Hitchcock Memorial Room, Amherst College; Goodell Li- 
brary, University of Massachusetts; The Houghton Library, Library of 
Harvard University; The Huntington Memorial Library, Oneonta, 
New York; The Iowa State Department of History and Archives, Des 
Moines; The Jones Library, Amherst; The Library of Congress; The 
Pierpont Morgan Library; The New York Public Library; Princeton 
University Library; Smith College Library; Wellesley College Library; 
Williston Memorial Library, Mount Holyoke College; and Yale Uni- 
versity Library. 

It is a pleasure to acknowledge the help extended to the enterprise 
by those librarians whose assistance has been extensive. Mr. Charles R. 
Green, of The Jones Library, not only took special pains to make his 
collections available but also assisted by putting me in touch with 
owners of manuscripts and memorabilia. Mr. Newton F. McKeon, 
director of the Amherst College Library, and Mr. Zolt&n Haraszti, 
curator of manuscripts in the Boston Public Library, both allowed the 
Dickinson papers in their collections to be submitted to special study. 
Mr. William A. Jackson and the members of the staff of the Houghton 
Library at Harvard, where most of the labor was performed, have eased 
the editorial burdens on all occasions with enlightenment and with an 
unobtrusive thoughtfulness for which I feel warm gratitude. 

On certain points touching upon Dickinson associations I have 
been aided by those who have supplied their reminiscences. For such 
kindness I am especially in debt to the late Margaret (Mrs. Orton L.) 
Clark, to Miss Louise B. Graves, to Mr. Robert P, Esty, and to Dr. 
Kendall Emerson. 

Most helpful too have been those who have volunteered or re- 
sponded to requests for information: Mrs. Helen H. Arnold, Mr. 
Alvan Barrus, Mrs. William Penn Cresson, Miss Margaret P. Hamlin, 
Mrs. Alfred Leete Hampson, and Mrs. Stuart Reynolds. Constantly 



xiv 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

useful has been Miss Louise K. Kelly's unpublished thesis, "A Con- 
cordance of Emily Dickinson's Poems" (Pennsylvania State College, 
1951). Mr. Willard Thorp graciously consented to read portions of 
the introduction. 

The grant of a fellowship by the John Simon Guggenheim Founda- 
tion gave assurance that this undertaking, complex and ramifying, 
could be brought to a successful conclusion. 

I wish especially to own with gratitude my debt to three persons. 
The late George Frisbie Whicher from the moment this task was 
begun let me share his expert knowledge and partake his enthusiasm; 
all his personal files he placed at my disposal. Jay Leyda generously 
offered material that he has gleaned in preparation for a documentary 
record of the life of Emily Dickinson on which he is engaged; his 
researches have corrected errors of fact and his evaluations have on 
occasion altered my judgments. The editorial assistance of Theodora 
Van Wagenen Ward has immeasurably lightened the task of prepar- 
ing this edition. She has acted as counselor in all matters of plan and 
execution, while devoting her time chiefly to the letters, now being 
prepared for publication. She wrote the section in the introduction on 
"Characteristics of the Handwriting/' and compiled the subject index. 

Lctwrenceville, New Jersey THOMAS H. JOHNSON 

27 April 1955 



xv 



CREATING THE POEMS 

THE POET AND THE MUSE 

On April fifteenth, 1862, Emily Dickinson wrote a professional man 
of letters to inquire whether her verses "breathed." She was then thirty- 
one years old. At the time she dispatched her letter to Thomas Went- 
worth Higginson, he had recently resigned from his Unitarian pulpit 
in Worcester to devote himself entirely to writing. Of Puritan New 
England stock, he was a graduate of Harvard College (1841) and 
Harvard Divinity School, and though not yet forty he had already 
made a name for himself as essayist, lecturer, and participant in the 
cause of liberal reform. Emily Dickinson dared bring herself to his 
attention because she had just read the "Letter to a Young Contrib- 
utor" that he had written as the lead article in the Atlantic Monthly 
for April. It was practical advice for beginners, written with genial, 
well-bred kindliness. One sentence she would quote back to him many 
years later, and it is a clue to the reason that she now felt emboldened 
to write him : "Such being the majesty of the art you presume to prac- 
tice, you can at least take time before dishonoring it." His article drew 
responses and specimens of verse, all of which, Higginson wrote 
James T. Fields, the editor of the Atlantic, were "not for publication." 
Yet, in spite of that judgment, Higginson immediately answered Miss 
Dickinson's letter, asking her to send more poems, inquiring her age, 
her reading, her companionships, and requesting further details about 
her writing. 

She replied at some length, withholding her age but responding 
to his other questions with a freedom from reticence that reveals the 
depth of her need for literary companionship. One sentence in this 
second letter surely misled Higginson as it has all others since the 
letter was published. "I made no verse ," she says, "but one or two 
until this winter - Sir - ," and cryptically hints as a reason for her new 
diversion certain emotional disturbances. The remark is a classic of 



xvn 



INTRODUCTION 

understatement. When Emily Dickinson wrote that letter to Higgin- 
son, she had in fact composed not fewer than three hundred poems, 
and was bringing others into being at a rate which would double the 
number by the end of the year. Her creative energies were at flood, 
and she was being overwhelmed by forces which she could not con- 
trol. 

, As the story can be reconstructed, at some time during the year 
1858 Emily Dickinson began assembling her poems into packets. Al- 
ways in ink, they are gatherings of four, five, or six sheets of letter 
paper usually folded once but sometimes single. They are loosely held 
together by thread looped through them at the spine at two points 
equidistant from the top and bottom. When opened up they may be 
read like a small book, a fact that explains why Emily's sister Lavinia, 
when she discovered them after Emily's death, referred to them as 
"volumes." All of the packet poems are. either fair copies or semifinal 
drafts, and they constitute two-thirds of the entire body of her poetry. 
For the most part the poems in a given packet seem to have been 
written and assembled as a unit. Since rough drafts of packet poems 
are almost totally lacking, one concludes that they were systematically 
discarded. 1 If the poems were in fact composed at the time the copies 
were made, as the evidence now seems to point, one concludes that 
nearly two-thirds of her poems were created in the brief span of eight 
years, centering on her early thirties. Her interest in the packet meth' 
od of assembling the verses thus coincides with the years of fullest 
productivity. In 1858 she gathered some fifty poems into packets. 
There are nearly one hundred so transcribed in 1859, some sixty-five 
in 1860, and in 1861 more than eighty. By 1862 the creative drive 
must have been almost frightening; during that year she transcribed 
into packets no fewer than three hundred and sixty-six poems, the 
greater part of them complete and final texts. 

1 There are forty-nine packets. The number of poems in a packet depends on the 
length of the poem and the number of sheets that form the gathering. One packet 
has as few as eight poems, one as many as thirty, but the average is about twenty. 
Beginning in 1858, they uniformly include all poetry through 1865. Three packets 
were assembled later: one in 1866, another in 1071 (to which one sheet dating from 
about 1875 was added), and one in 1872. 

xviii 



CREATING THE POEMS 

Whether this incredible number was in fact composed in that 
year or represents a transcription of earlier worksheet drafts can never 
be established by direct evidence. But the pattern established during 
the preceding four years reveals a gathering momentum, and the 
quality of tenseness and prosodic skill uniformly present in the poems 
of 1861-1862 bears scant likeness to the conventionality of theme 
and treatment in the poems of 1858-1859. Excepting a half dozen oc- 
casional verses written in the early fifties, there is not a single scrap 
of poetry that can be dated earlier than 1858. 

The issue is not necessarily material as far as her motive in writ- 
ing Higginson is concerned, except as her need to do so had now be- 
come imperative. For her the portentous question was a practical one 
Assembled about her was a teeming body of verse, and somehow a 
way of sharing it must be found. As it happens, there were to be three 
more years of full creativeness. In 1863 she wrote some one hundred 
forty poems; in 1864, nearly two hundred; and about eighty or so ir 
1865. After that, throughout her life, the yearly average never ex 
ceeded twenty, one half of which never progressed beyond the work 
sheet stage. Though several of the later poems are imperishable lyrics 
she would never again be driven by the frenzy that possessed her ir 
the early sixties. She achieved an intensity, passionate and often de 
spairing, in those years which gives to it the quality of "circum 
ference" and "awe" that she sought. The question now was what t< 
do with these rapidly growing assemblages of manuscript. 

One of the unanswered questions is what happened to the poem: 
that Emily Dickinson wrote in her youth. Aside from two valentines 
there are onlyjhj^ejyerses that can be identified surely as having beer 
written before 1858, and all are incorporated in letters. One is to he 
brother Austin, and the others to her friend Susan Gilbert. All ar< 
sentimental in tone and commonplace in thought. Pore as one ma; 
over the verses in the early packets to identify those which offer clue 
to earlier associations, only the most tenuous appear. One poem, "Al 
overgrown by cunning moss," commemorates the death of Charlott 
Bronte in 1855. But the very first line indicates the passage of time 
The four-stanza poem "I like to see it lap the miles" expresses excite 



xix 



INTRODUCTION 



ment about the novelty of a steam locomotive. The opening of the 
two local railroad branches in Amherst in 1853 was something of an 
event. But the only copy of the poem is a semifinal draft written about 
1862, four years after she commenced making her packets and there- 
fore much later than one would expect to find the poem in packet 
form were earlier poems being transcribed. In one instance only is there 
positive evidence that early poems were gathered into packets. The 
poem sent to Sue in 1853, "On this wondrous sea'' (no. 4), is dupli- 
cated in a packet of 1858. Perhaps 1858 was the year of Emily Dickin- 
son's assurance of her destiny. 

Though one may be reasonably sure that she wrote more than five 
poems before 1858 -in fact, many more -one begins to question 
whether there were many that she thought worth preserving by the 
time she began fashioning her packets. A pattern emerges in her life 
during the fifties that seems to have direct bearing on her function, 
not as an artist that will come later, but as a writer of verse. 

In the late forties Benjamin Franklin Newton was a law student 
in the office of Emily's father, Edward Dickinson. In 1850 Newton 
set up a practice for himself in Worcester, and in the following year 
he married. In March 1853, in his thirty-third year, he died of tuber- 
culosis. Ben Newton had been one of Emily's earliest "preceptors," 
and his memory always remained with her. He was a Unitarian and 
considered somewhat advanced in his thinking. While in Amherst he 
had introduced the Dickinson girls to the writings of the Bronte 
sisters and of the feminist Lydia Maria Child. He presented Emilv 
with a copy of Emerson's poems in 1849, two y e ^rs after they were 
published and many years before Emerson was accepted as a repre^ 
sentative spokesman of his time. Newton awakened in Emily Dickin- 
son a response to intellectual independence and a delight in literature 
which later made her call him the "friend who taught me Immortal- 
ity." She told Higginson in the summer of 1862, after he had praised 
some verses that she sent him: "Your letter gave no Drunkenness, 
because I tasted Rum before . . . My dying Tutor told me that he 
would like to live till I had been a poet, but Death was much of Mob 
as I could master -then." 



xx 



CREATING THE POEMS 

It would thus appear that when Emily Dickinson was about 
twenty years old her latent talents were invigorated by a gentle, grave 
young man who taught her how to observe the world. She made the 
statement to Higginson that "for several years" after her tutor's death 
her lexicon was her only companion. Perhaps during the five years 
after Newton 's death she was trying to fashion verses in a desultory 
manner. Her muse had left the land and she must await the coming 
of another. That event occurred in 1858 or 1859 in the person of the 
Reverend Charles Wadsworth. 

Still predominant among nature poems belonging to 1859 are 
such effusions as "Whose cheek is this," but there is also "Bring me 
the sunset in a cup," and "These are the days when birds come back." 
This is also the year of "Safe in their alabaster chambers," "Our share 
of night to bear," and "Success." In the following year, though theii 
number is still few, are an increasing proportion of poems written with 
firmer texture and deepened purpose: "Just lost, when I was saved/ 1 
"I shall know why -when Time is over," and "At last, to be identi- 
fied." By 1 86 1 the number of poems dealing sentimentally with nature 
is on the wane, supplanted by poems of immediate, sometimes vio- 
lent intensity: "I can wade grief," "What would I give to see hi^ 
face," "I like a look of agony," and "Wild nights, wild nights." Poems 
beginning with the personal pronoun are conspicuous. A volcanic 
commotion is becoming apparent in the emotional life of Emily 
Dickinson. Though all evidence is circumstantial and will always 
remain so, the inescapable conclusion seems to be that about this 
time she fell in love with Wadsworth. (A later attachment for Judge 
Otis P. Lord of Salem had no effect whatsoever on her poetry or her 
creative talent as a poet, and is therefore not relevant to this discussion.) 

Charles Wadsworth was the pastor of the Arch Street Presbyterian 
Church in Philadelphia from 1850 until April 1862. When Emily 
and Lavinia returned from a three-week visit in Washington in April 
1854, where they had been with their father, then serving as a member 
of Congress, they stopped over in Philadelphia for two weeks early in 
May as guests of their old school friend Eliza Coleman, whose father, 
the Reverend Lyman Coleman, had been their principal back in 



xxi 



INTRODUCTION 

Amherst Academy days. Though there is no record of the event, one 
supposes that Emily went to hear Wadsworth preach. Perhaps she 
met him then. The only certain early fact is that he called on her some 
five years later while he was still in mourning after his mother's death 
in October 1859. 

That visit and another he made briefly in the summer of 1880, 
are the only two known, and quite possibly the only ones he ever 
made. But letters that she wrote after his death on April first, 1882, 
state much and imply more. Twice she calls Wadsworth her "closest" 
or "dearest earthly friend." She says that he was her "shepherd from 
little girl* hood" and that she cannot conjecture a world without him. 
A year later she wrote her dear friend, Mrs. Josiah Gilbert Holland: 
"All other Surprise is at last monotonous, but the Death of the Loved 
is all moments - now. Love has but one Date -The first of April' 
'Today, Yesterday, and Forever/ " 

Over the years she had come to envision him as a "Man of Sor- 
row," and "a dusk gem, born of troubled waters." Both visits were 
probably made at her request on occasions when he happened to be 
traveling nearby. The letters they exchanged did not survive her 
death. Those that she wrote to him, sent in covering notes to be for- 
warded by Mrs. Holland, were not so handled to mask a surreptitious 
romance. Neither Dr. nor Mrs. Holland would have cared to be party 
to such dealings. The procedure was one that Emily Dickinson adopted 
for many of her later transactions with the outside world. Except to 
her sister Lavinia, who never saw Wadsworth, she talked to no one 
about him. That fact alone establishes the place he filled in the struc- 
ture of her emotion. Whereas Newton as muse had awakened W tn 
a sense of her talents, Wadsworth as muse made her a poet. 

The Philadelphia pastor, now forty-seven, was at the zenith of his 
mature influence, fifteen years married and the head of a family, an 
established man of God whose rectitude was unquestioned. To her 
it was a basic necessity that he continue in all ways to be exactly the 
image of him that she had created. The fantasy that Wadsworth pro- 
posed an elopement has no basis in fact, and controverts all that is 
known of the psychology of either. The "bridal" and renunciation 

xxii 



CREATING THE POEMS 

poems, almost all of which were written in 1861 and 1862, have 
meaning when interpreted as a part of her lifelong need for a shep- 
herd, a muse whom she could adore with physical passion in her 
imagination. The extent to which Wadsworth realized the nature of 
her adoration can only be conjectured. He was a cosmopolitan minis- 
ter of ready perceptions. Her eagerness after his death to learn from 
his lifelong friend, James D. Clark, details of his life and personality, 
about which she says herself she knew little or nothing, is a measure 
of his reticences as a person. When she initiated her correspondence 
with Higginson, she turned to one who could serve as a critic of her 
verse, which she was now writing with daemonicjenergy. She soon 
came to call Higginson her "preceptor" and her "safest friend/* and 
quite literally be became both to her. But he was never what Newton 
had once been, and Wadsworth overpoweringly came to be: the source 
of inspiration itself. 

The crisis in Emily Dickinson's life seems to have been precipi- 
tated by Wadsworth 's acceptance of a call to the Calvary Church in 
San Francisco in December 1861. One can believe^that Tie casually 
mentioned, as long before as^September, that he was considering the! 
call. It is the plausible conjecture usually set forth to explain two sen- 
tences in her second letter to Higginson. Having spoken of losing the 
friend who taught her immortality, she goes on to say: "Then I found 
one more -but he was not contented I be his scholar -so he left the 
Land/' And she gave as the primary reason for writing poetry at all: 
"I had a terror -since September -I could tell to none -and so I sing, 
as the Boy does by the Burying Ground - because I am afraid." 

To Emily Dickinson, Wadsworth's removal was terrifying because 
she feared she might never be able to control her emotions or her rea- 
son without his guidance. It is at this time that she began to dress 
entirely in white, adopting, as she calls it, her "white election." The 
name Calvary now first appears in her poems. In 1862 she used it 
nine times, always in verses charged with intense emotion. She speaks 
of herself as "Queen" of Calvary. Grieving for a lost lover or for one 
renounced, she recalls "old times in Calvary." In the poem "Title 
Divine in mine," as "Empress of Calvary" she is "Born Bridalled 



xxm 



INTRODUCTION 

Shrouded in a Day." Once in 1863 it is introduced in the poem be 
ginning 'Where Thou art that is Home/ Cashmere or Calvary the 
Same . . . / So I may Come/* No other place name is comparabl) 
used or anywhere nearly so often. As far as eye could peer, Wads- 
worth's function as preceptor must perforce cease. It was during the 
time that he and his family were preparing to sail for California that 
Emily Dickinson initiated her correspondence with Higginson. 

It is significant that in June 1869, after Wadsworth's return froir 
San Francisco had been publicly announced, Emily Dickinson wrote 
to Higginson inviting him to Amherst. "You were not aware," she 
says, "that you saved my Life. To thank you in person has been since 
then one of my few requests." Higginson could know part of what 
she meant that he had given her private audience for her poems. 
But he could not know, as she of course was aware that he could not, 
in just what way he had provided a release from the tensions and pre- 
served her sanity. Two very unfinished worksheet drafts, which have 
every evidence of having been written in 1869, express a mood of 
jubilation. One deserves to be quoted: 

Oh Sumptuous moment 

Slower go 

That I may gloat on thee 

Twill never be the same to starve 

Now I abundance see - 

Which was to famish, then or now- 
The difference of Day 
Ask him unto the Gallows led - 
With morning in the sky 

By 1870 Wadsworth was again established in Philadelphia, in an- 
other church, where he continued as pastor until his death. The crisis 
in Emily Dickinson's life was over. Though nothing again would 
wring from her the anguish and the fulfillment of the years 1861- 
1865, she continued to write verses throughout her life. Proportionately 
the number of them is sharply decreased, but among them are many 
that embody her art at its serenest. 

xxiv 



CREATING THE POEMS 



PRIVATE AUDIENCES 



The first letter to Higginson had a far clearer purpose than he 
could be expected to penetrate, because the fact is that within the 
year two of Emily Dickinson *s poems had been published in the 
Springfield Daily Republican, the second of them just two weeks be- 
fore she wrote him. Both had appeared anonymously. She does not 
ask Higginson whether he thinks her poetry is now ready for publi- 
cation, but she certainly implies such a request, as he of course in 
ferred. As she phrased it, is her verse jdive"? Does it "breathe"? 

We can never know whether Emily Dickinson's fear of publica- 
tion would have been mastered had her letter been addressed to a less 

^^~ . " 

timid critic. It is certain that she required literary companionship and 
equaHyrertain that the nature of her queries to Higginson have mean- 
ing only if the questioner has a public in mind. She turned to an estab- 
lished man of letters, known to be especially sympathetic to the status 
of women in general and to women writers in particular, one who in 
his Atlantic article had addressed "young contributors," and praised 
the qualities she herself most admired: a belief in the majesty of the 
art she presumed to practice, and a profound respect for aptness and 
economy of language. But Higginson the critic was not the man she 
should have written. His taste was conventional and his perceptions 
limited. At the same time it should be said that the kinship on a per- 
sonal level came to be mutually recognized, and over the years it took 
on a meaning for her quite apart from any value as a shaping force in 
her art. Higginson became a literary mentor in some vague way cre- 
ated by her assurance of what he was as a kindly gentleman, rather 
than of what he might attempt to say as a judge of her writing. Had 
he responded with the insight that prompted Emerson to write his 
famous letter to Whitman, her literary career might well have begun 
during her lifetime. 

Her realization that Higginson the critic had nothing to offer would 
come shortly. Even before she wrote to him she had been made aware 
of the liberties that editors took with one's text, to smooth a rhyme 01 
make a "sensible" metaphor, with the result that the printed object 



xxv 



INTRODUCTION 

before one were better disowned. Her poem "I taste a liquor never 
brewed" had appeared in the "Original Poetry" column of the Repub- 
lican just a year before, in May 1861. As she had written the first 
stanza, it read: 

I taste a liquor never brewed - 
From Tankards scooped in Pearl - 
Not all the Frankfort Berries 
Yield such an Alcohol! 

But the editors wanted a rhyme and they produced a version that could 
never, by any stretch of imagination, have been hers: 

I taste a liquor never brewed, 

From tankards scooped in pearl; 
Not Frankfort berries yield the sense 

Such a delirious whirl. 

The Republican editor, Samuel Bowles, and his associate Dr. J. G. 
Holland were close friends of the Dickinsons. Emily sent them oc- 
casional verses in her letters, and they were urging her to let them 
publish some. But they reserved the right to correct rhymes and alter 
figures of speech. At the time she wrote Higginson she does not seem 
to be trying to avoid publishing. On the contrary, she seems to be 
inquiring how one can publish and at the same time preserve the in- 
tegrity of one's art. The poem most recently published in the Repub- 
lican, just six weeks before on March first, was the same version of 
"Safe in their alabaster chambers" that she enclosed in her first letter 
to Higginson. The other three were "The nearest dream recedes un- 
realized," "We play at paste," and "I'll tell you how the sun rose." 
They had been selected with care and are in fact the work of a mature 
artist. But she needed some confirmation from a professional judge 
because the only advice she had yet been given had come from an en- 
thusiastic amateur and had not proved helpful. 

It had been her custom, before she initiated her correspondence 
with Higginson, to turn for advice to Susan Gilbert Dickinson, her 

xxvi 



CREATING THE POEMS 

brother Austin's wife. Vivacious, witty, and attractive, Sue was one of 
Emily's oldest and dearest friends. The girls had known each other 
from youth. Sue, orphaned at seven by her mother's death, was 
brought up by other members of her family in Amherst and elsewhere. 
When Sue was away from Amherst, the two kept in regular touch 
through letters, and the bond was strengthened by their literary in- 
terests. The tie was permanently established when Sue and Austin 
were married in 1856, and settled in the house next door built as a 
wedding gift by Austin's father. Until the year of her death, Emily 
regularly sent poems to Sue, and the total of some two hundred seventy 
thus transmitted is vastly greater than that sent to others. In 1861 
Emily still turned to Sue for criticism and advice. In that year she sent 
Sue a copy of her "Alabaster" poem, evidently with the intent of 
grooming it to some purpose, perhaps for the Republican. The details 
of the letter-exchange are given in the notes to the poem. It is clear 
that Emily could not get herself to take Sue's advice about letting 
the first stanza stand alone. Her sensibilities were truer, as they would 
prove to be when at her importunity Higginson offered his criticism. 
The attachment of the sisters continued through the years, but Emily 
never again sought advice from Sue. She asked professional advice 
once again, and once only, when she wrote to Higginson. Her self- 
discovery grew out of those two experiences, and by the summer of 
1862 she knew that she alone could chart her solitary voyage. Mean- 
while, the Republican published the earlier version of the "Alabaster" 
poem. Higginson never specifically alluded to the version he received 
and she never mentioned the poem again. 

The first letters to Higginson are breathlessly expectant. By the 
time she came to answer his second note, she knew for a certainty 
what he thought of her publishing prospects: "I smile when you sug- 
gest I delay 'to publish' - that being foreign to my thought, as Firma- 
ment to Fin - If fame belonged to me, I could not escape her - if she 
did not, the longest day would pass me on the chase - and the approba- 
tion of my Dog, would forsake me -then -My Barefoot Rank is bet- 
ter-" There is a tenseness and gravity in her allusion to "fame," a 
word that in the years immediately following she probed deeply in 



xxvn 



INTRODUCTION 

some of her finest utterances. She can accept his verdict because it 
comes from a final court and confirms her whole experience. With the 
issue settled, and sensing Higginson's personal integrity, she set about 
to establish the student-preceptor relationship as a game she would 
play for the rest ofjier life. Their relationship ^stabilized during that 
firsTyear of correspondence into exchanges of amiable pleasantries, in 
which groove it moved until the end. The luminous intensity of her 
quest disappeared, now that she had received her answer. 

To be sure, an audience of one in a technical sense is a public, 
and she could henceforth send poems to Higginson and others. But 
with the exception of those to Higginson and to Sue, the number of 
poems that thus gained a hearing is a miniscule fraction of the whole. 
The Bowleses and Hollands and the Norcross cousins received re- 
spectively some two or three dozen over the years. To the thirty or so 
other correspondents who were recipients of verses, for the most part 
she sent lines appropriate to special occasions. There are poems of 
condolence for the bereaved, verses to speed a departing friend, thank- 
you notes to accompany the gift of a flower for those who have ex- 
tended some favor. But the great bulk of the poetry, including most 
of the important philosophical and love poems, were probably never 
seen by anyone except herself. All who knew her were aware that she 
wrote poetry, but no one, not even her sister, knew how much 
Lavinia's amazement when she discovered the packets after Emily 's 
death was genuine. 

Emily Dickinson's preoccupation with the subject of fame is a 
striking characteristic of "the poems written between 1862 and 1865, 
the years of full creativeness. The dedication to her art was intensified 
during the first exchange of letters with Higginson during 1862, a 
dedication that led to renunciation of fame in her lifetime and, as the 
wellsprings of her creativeness dried up after 1865, to increasing se- 
clusion. There are four later instances of publication during her life- 
time. Two poems, "Some keep the sabbath going to church" and 
"Blazing in gold and quenching in purple/' were published in 1864. 
Possibly her consent was tacit, but it is unlikely that she wished 
them to appear. In 1866 "A narrow fellow in the grass" was issued in 



xxvm 



CREATING THE POEMS 

the Republican, ' robbed" of her, she informed Higginson in order to 
make clear to him that she herself did not wish it published. The last 
to appear was "Success," in 1878. Its publishing history is complex, and 
reveals the degree to which Emily Dickinson by then had become 
psychologically incapable of consenting to allow her verses to be 
printed. The story deals principally with Helen Hunt Jackson. 

Helen Fiske was the daughter of Nathan Welby Fiske, professor 
of Moral Philosophy and Metaphysics in Amherst College from 1836 
until his death eleven years later. As small children the girls, who 
were of an age, had known each other, though their memory of the 
fact was vague when the acquaintance was renewed on a formal basis 
many years later. After the death of Mrs. Fiske in 1844 Helen lived 
with relatives elsewhere, and though she maintained some Amherst 
ties, she had none during those years with Emily Dickinson. At 
twenty-two she married Edward Bissell Hunt. When Colonel Higgin- 
son met her in Newport in 1866, she had been a widow for three 
years and had recently turned to writing as a way of regaining her 
balance after the loss, not only of her husband, but of her two children. 
It was probably Higginson who, sometime during the summer of 1868, 
contrived that the two Amherst authors should meet again. They cer- 
tainly knew each other, however casually, in the very early seventies; 
but one was a restless traveler with a growing literary reputation, and 
the other a recluse poet whose few known verses were conveyed in 
occasional letters. Helen Hunt visited in Amherst during the summer 
of 1870, but there is no record that they met. The acquaintanceship 
was close enough by 1875 so that when Helen Hunt married William 
Sharpless Jackson, a Colorado businessman, Emily Dickinson sent her 
a note of congratulation. From Helen Jackson's reply it is clear that she 
had seen a few of Emily Dickinson's poems. The supposition is that 
she had made copies of some that Colonel Higginson had shown her 
rather than that Emily Dickinson had sent them to her, for the rela- 
tionship of the two women was still formal. Helen Jackson concluded 
her letter: 

I hope some day, somewhere I shall find you in a spot where we 
can know each other. I wish very much that you would write to me 



XXIX 



INTRODUCTION 

now and then, when it did not bore you. I have a little manuscript 
volume with a few of your verses in it --and I read them very 
often You axe a great poet and it is a wrong to the day you live 
in, that you wilTnoTsmg~aloud. When you are what men call dead, 
you will be sorry you were so stingy. 2 

During the summer of 1876, Mrs. Jackson began her negotiations 
to secure a contribution from Emily Dickinson for a proposed anthol- 
ogy of verse. In this year the well-known Boston publishing firm of 
Roberts Brothers decided to bring out a series of anonymous books 
which they called the "No Name Series/' They were to be stories, as 
the circular advertised, written by American authors, "each a great 
unknown." The first, announced for September, was Mercy Phil- 
brick's Choice, and was widely reviewed when it appeared. Some 
critics correctly guessed that Helen Hunt Jackson was the author, but 
neither she nor Thomas Niles, the publisher, confirmed or denied the 
conjecture. Some fourteen "No Names" were issued, and Niles, en- 
couraged by Mrs. Jackson, decided to bring out as a final volume an 
anthology of anonymous verse which would be contributed by Amer- 
ican and English writers. The advertisements hinted that the readers 
would encounter poems by Christina Rossetti, William Morris, Jean 
Ingelow, and "H. H." Such an anthology would greatly extend the 
chance for speculation, and the volume, called A Masque of Poets, 
appeared in 1878. It was one of the most profitable ventures Roberts 
Brothers ever undertook, and today, because it contains the first print- 
ing of poems by Thoreau, Lanier, and Dickinson, it is a collector's 
item. 

During the summer of 1876, while the whole series was largely in 
the planning stage, Helen Jackson, vacationing in Princeton, Massa- 
chusetts, wrote this letter: 

My dear Miss Dickinson ... I enclose to you a circular 
which may interest you. When the volume of Verse is published in 
this series, I shall contribute to it: and I want to persuade you to. 
Surely, in the shelter of such double anonymousness as that will be, 

"These unpublished letters from Helen Hunt Jackson are in the Dickinson 
collection at Harvard. 

XXX 



CREATING THE POEMS 

you need not shrink. I want to see some of your verses in print. 
Unless you forbid me, I will send some that I have. May 
I?- . . . 8 

Uncertain of her decision, or at least not wishing to estrange by a re- 
fusal, Emily Dickinson did not reply. On October tenth Mrs. Jackson 
called on her in Amherst to plead in person. Believing that Colonel 
Higginson could somehow resolve her dilemma, Emily immediately 
wrote him, enclosing the circular, and telling him that Mrs. Jackson 
"wished me to write for this - 1 told her I was unwilling, and she asked 
me why? -I said I was incapable and she seemed not to believe me 
and asked me not to decide for a few Days - meantime, she would 
write - She was so sweetly noble, I would regret to estrange her, and 
if you disapproved it, and thought me unfit, she would believe you- 
I am sorry to flee so often to my safest friend, but hope he permits 
me-'' Under the circumstances one is not surprised that Higginson 
was misled and thought that Mrs. Jackson was asking for a story. Ac- 
cepting the role of intercessor for one so sweetly noble, her safest 
friend replied: ". . . It is always hard to judge for another of the bent 
of inclination or range of talent; but I should not have thought of 
advising you to write stories, as it would not seem to me to be in your 
line. Perhaps Mrs. Jackson thought that the change & variety might 
be good for you: but if you really feel a strong unwillingness to at- 
tempt it, I don't think she would mean to urge you. . ." 4 Some eight- 
een months elapsed before Mrs. Jackson again pursued the subject. 
In the spring of 1878 she wrote from Colorado Springs: 

My dear friend . . . Would it be of any use to ask you once 
more for one or two of your poems, to come out in the volume of 
"no name" poetry which is to be published before long by Roberts 
Bros.? If you will give me permission I will copy them -sending 
them in my own handwriting - and promise never to tell any one, 
not even the publishers, whose the poems are. Could you not bear 
this much of publicity? Only you and I would recognize the poems. 

8 Harvard College Library. 

4 The first of the two Higginson letters here quoted is in the Boston Public 
Library; the second is in Harvard College Library. 



XXXI 



INTRODUCTION 

I wish very much you would do this - and I think you would have 
much amusement in seeing to whom the critics, those shrewd 
guessers, would ascribe your verses. . . 

That was in April, and the publication date for A Masque was but 
seven months away. Mrs. Jackson could not take silence for a refusal, 
but she waited until October twenty-fifth before she wrote again, from 
a nearer vantage in Hartford, Connecticut. 

My dear friend . . . Now - will you send me the poem? No - 
will you let me send the "Success" - which I know by heart -to 
Roberts Bros for the Masque of Poets? If you will, it will give me a 
great pleasure. I ask it as a personal favour to myself -Can you re- 
fuse the only thing I perhaps shall ever ask at your hands? 

The fact that the volume was on sale three weeks later, and that it 
must already have been coming from the bindery at the time Mrs. 
Jackson wrote the last letter, strongly suggests that her plea for a 
"personal favour" was wrung from her because the volume was indeed 
already in print. The letter written from Colorado Springs on Decem- 
ber eighth seems to acknowledge some kind of consent, however 
vaguely it may have been given. In any event the letter draws a longer 
breath: 

My dear friend, I suppose by this time you have seen the Masque 
of Poets. I hope you have not regretted giving me that choice bit of 
verse for it. I was pleased to see that it had in a manner, a special 
place, being chosen to end the first part of the volume, -on the 
whole, the volume is a disappointment to me. Still I think it has 
much interest for all literary people. I confess myself quite unable to 
conjecture the authorship of most of the poems. . . 

Thomas Niles sent a copy of the volume to Emily Dickinson, who 
wrote to thank him for it. He replied: 

Dear Miss Dickinson You were entitled to a copy of "A 
Masque of Poets" without thanks, for your valuable contribution 
which for want of a known sponsor Mr Emerson has generally 
had to father. 

xxxii 



CREATING THE POEMS 



I wanted to send you a proof of your poem, wh. as you have 
doubtless perceived was slightly changed in phraseology . . . 



By this time Emily Dickinson had learned ^h^t-te--xpect of the 
editoria^Htte-pqjial^but in this instance the changes must haveT>een 
especially galling. Five alterations had been introduced into the text. 
The friendship with Helen Jackson remained cordial. Emily 
Dickinson occasionally sent her verses, and Mrs. Jackson continued to 
urge her friend to "sing aloud." Though the letters of the Amherst 
poet became increasingly chatty and intimate, they remained to the last 
pointedly silent on the matter of publication. On that issue her mind 
was settled. 

THE POET AT WORK 

The manuscripts of nearly all the poems survive. The text is always 
in one of three stages of composition: a fair copy, a semifinal draft, 
or a worksheet draft. It sometimes has been set down in two or more 
variant fair copies, sent to different friends. On occasion it is found in 
all three stages, thus affording the chance to watch the creative spirit 
in action. Of the total extant holographs, two-thirds are fair copies, 
the finished drafts neatly transcribed in ink on sheets of letter station- 
ery. Some three hundred never progressed beyond the semifinal stage; 
they are the poems which, like many of the fair copies, are neatly as- 
sembled into packets, almost completed, but with suggested changes 
of one or more words or phrases carefully added in the margin or at 
the bottom. Nearly two hundred survive in worksheet draft only. 
They are the rough originals, always in pencil, and jotted down on 
paper scraps: on flaps or backs of envelopes, discarded letters, wrap- 
ping paper, edges of newspapers - in fact, on anything that lay con- 
veniently at hand. 

The packets, which Emily Dickinson assembled principally during 
1858-1865, the years of her greatest productivity, are the storehouse 
where she gathered the fruits of her labors and upon which she drew 
from time to time when she wished to share the product with a friend. 



xxx 



INTRODUCTION 

It was therefore not important to her that all the poems in the packets 
should be fair copies. She could create a fair copy from a semifinal 
draft when she transcribed a poem for some specific occasion. Indeed, 
the fair copies themselves seem to have been considered alterable as 
long as they remained packet copies, and she not infrequently changed 
them when she selected them for transmission in a letter. Thus she 
created many of her variants. 

The largest part of the poetry survives in but a single draft, what- 
ever the state of composition may be, and for that reason relatively 
few poems show her creative method. Even so, these relatively few add 
up to a considerable total, and assembled they are an impressive body 
of documents in the manifold history of artistic generation. For one 
thing, the several stages demonstrate the extent to which she adopted 
her own suggested changes. They show a worksheet draft redacted 
into a semifinal one, and that into a fair copy which clearly is the text 
that satisfied her, since it is the one she incorporated without variants 
into several letters. Finally they show her returning in later years to 
her early packet copies, attempting refinements. Such she achieved on 
occasion. But more than once she turned a fair copy into a worksheet 
draft which she ultimately abandoned, thus leaving the poem in a par- 
ticularly chaotic state. Above all, they show her filing her lines to 
gain that economy of expression which, when achieved, is the mark 
of her special genius. Observe her at work. 

In 1 862 Emily Dickinson copied the semifinal draft of "One need 
not be a chamber to be haunted (no. 670) into packet 13. The sug- 
gested changes that follow the text she assembled in order at the end 
of the poem, with crosses at those points in the text where she wished 
to consider substitutions were she later to undertake a final draft. In 
this instance she did just that. Several months later she restudied her 
text and sent a redaction of the poem to Sue. From among the six 
possibilities for change she selected but one. But she made four other 
substitutions not even suggested in the semifinal draft. 5 She followed 
precisely the same method in "Give little anguish" (no. 310), written 

5 Both autographs are reproduced in facsimile in Harvard Library Bulletin, VII 
Ci953)> between pages 260 and 261. 

xxxiv 



CREATING THE POEMS 

in the same year. The semifinal draft offers one alternative, which is 
not adopted in the fair copy, although the latter incorporates substi- 
tute words not even suggested in the semifinal draft. Here then are 
examples of semifinal packet copies which were redacted into fair 
copies, and thus her final choices are known. Such redactions are not 
common. But the instances cited above demonstrate the arbitrariness 
of her adoptions and substitutions, and they make clear that no pattern 
applicable to a "final" text of unfinished drafts can ever be established. 
Semifinal drafts, unless she herself redacted them into fair copies, 
must always remain unfinished. There are instances where she has 
underlined the suggested change as if to indicate that her choice was 
made. But later fair copies of such poems are not consistent in adopt- 
ing such apparent choices. (See for example "He preached upon 
breadth," no. 1207, and "No life can pompless pass away," no. 1626.) 
The mood of the moment played its part. 

There are instances where two or more variant fair copies of a 
poem survive or are known to have been written, yet no one of the 
texts can be called "final." Such is true of "Blazing in gold" (no. 228). 
The poem describes a sunset which in one version stoops as low as 
"the kitchen window"; in another, as low as an "oriel window"; in a 
third, as low as "the Otter's Window." These copies were set down 
over a period of five years, from 1861 to 1866, and one text is ap- 
parently as valid as another. 

The four copies of one of the later poems, "A dew sufficed itself" 
(no. 1437), are especially interesting examples of her creative process. 
They are variants in the sense that they propose different word choices. 
But since the earliest (about 1874) and the latest (1878) are iden- 
tical in text, one may infer that intermediary texts even in fair copies 
had no finality so long as she was attempting to establish a reading. 
The packet copy is semifinal in that it offers an alternative for the 
two final lines. In the intermediary fair copies the alternative is 
adopted. In the final 1878 fair copy it is rejected. The full story of 
the substitutions and rejections is set forth in the notes to the text, 
where it will be observed that the earliest and latest versions are iden- 
tical. In this instance, the wheel has come full circle. 



XXXV 



INTRODUCTION 

Two worksheet stages of "March is the month of expectation" 
(no. 1404) led to the finished draft, all composed about 1877. The 
second of the two began as a fair copy, but was converted into a work- 
sheet by several alterations made in pencil. Finally, in a fair copy to 
Sue, she made her choices, and the poem was finished. 

There is one notable instance of a poem of three stanzas, almost 
final, converted back into a uniquely chaotic worksheet and left that 
way. In 1862 she copied "Two butterflies went out at noon" (no. 533) 
into a packet. It is finished except for the final line, for which an alter- 
native reading is suggested. Some sixteen years later, to judge by the 
handwriting, she attempted a redaction of it. On another sheet of paper 
she began the poem anew but, like the butterfly itself, the poet too 
was lost. The text is rare in the degree of its complications, but it is 
a fascinating document of poetic creativeness in travail. The work- 
sheet draft of "Crisis is sweet" (no. 1416), written about 1877, is 
almost as complicated and appears never to have been finished. One 
other such has moving power even as it stands. About 1885, one 
imagines from the evidence of handwriting, she set down an unfinished 
draft of "Extol thee- could I -then I will" (no. 1643). It is futile to 
speculate how it might have been shaped if it had been finished. It 
deserves to be known even as it stands. 

Although these particular drafts seem never to have resulted in 
finished poems, there is ample evidence that absence of a fair copy 
does not mean the poem never progressed beyond the worksheet stage. 
Emily Dickinson was accustomed to send copies of her poems to 
friends, often written for special occasions. Such poems among the 
published letters in some instances are lost, but the worksheet drafts 
from which the fair copies were redacted survive. Thus the number of 
poems originally completed was somewhat greater than the number of 
extant worksheet drafts would indicate. 

No poet in the language has achieved fulfillment by way of the 
single quatrain with greater sureness than Emily Dickinson. One of 
her greatest she incorporated into a letter which she wrote Colonel 
Higginson in mid-June 1877 (no. 1393): 



XXXVI 



CREATING THE POEMS 

Lay this Laurel on the One 
Too intrinsic for Renown - 
Laurel -vail your deathless tree- 
Him you chasten, that is He! 

The lines were written in memory of her father who had died three 
years before. Their immediate source of inspiration was a seven-stanza 
Civil War elegy which Higginson had contributed to Scrtbners 
Monthly in the month of her father's death and which, because of the 
association she had given it, she was rereading, 6 The poem survives 
in two earlier drafts, one a worksheet and the other a fair copy, but 
both consisting of two quatrains. It is not possible to know whether 
she intended the poem finally to stand as two stanzas or one. She 
often used but one stanza of a two-stanza poem when she incorporated 
verses in her letters. But there is good reason to conjecture, in the 
light of the whole process by which the quatrain was inspired and 
transmitted to Higginson, that she intended it to stand as the full 
realization of her intent. 

A final word about the creative process. One should not gather 
the impression that all poems first existed in rough drafts which were 
laboriously converted into fair copies. There are several instances of 
worksheet drafts -that is, poems jotted down in pencil on paper 
scraps -which stand finished. The inspiration and the act of genera- 
tion were one and complete. The deservedly famous "Humming- 
bird" (no. 1463) was evidently so created. It is one of the later poems, 
written about 1879. ^ survives in five holographs; a sixth, known to 
have been made, is now lost. All six are identical in text. All were sent 
to friends, thus indicating the assurance she felt about its quality. 
Mrs. Todd is quoted as saying that in one copy which Emily Dickin- 
son sent her, the second line was written at the bottom of the page: 
"with a delusive, dissembling, dissolving, renewing wheel/* Obviously 
whatever hesitation she had about a final choice came after the poem 
was finished. It must have been fleeting too, for none of the suggested 

6 For another poem, also sent to Higginson, which passed through an interesting 
worksheet stage, see "The last of summer is delight" (no. 1353). 



xxxvn 



INTRODUCTION 

changes prevailed. The absence of variants in the six fair copies, the 
exuberance of tone, the^ats^bsolute pitch, the assurance of the writer 
in her achievenfent^fl these factorTconB^m the impression that the 
poem was spontaneously conceived. It is of the fellowship of life 
which springs fully armed from the brow of Jove. ^~ 



xxxvm 



EDITING THE POEMS 

1890-1945 

Shortly after Emily Dickinson's death on May fifteenth, 1886, her 
sister Lavinia discovered a locked box in which Emily had placed her 
poems. 7 Lavinia's amazement seems to have been genuine. Though 
the sisters had lived intimately together under the same roof all their 
lives, and though Lavinia had always been aware that her sister wrote 
poems, she had not the faintest concept of the great number of them. 
The story of Lavinia's willingness to spare them because she found 
no instructions specifying that they be destroyed, and her search for 
an editor and a publisher to give them to the world has already been 
told in some detail. 8 

Lavinia first consulted the two people most interested in Emily's 
poetry, her sister-in-law Susan Dickinson, and Mrs. Todd. David 
Peck Todd, a graduate of Amherst College in 1875, returned to Am- 
herst with his young bride in 1881 as director of the college observa- 
tory and soon became professor of Astronomy and Navigation. 
These were the months shortly before Mrs. Edward Dickinson's death, 
when neighbors were especially thoughtful. Mrs. Todd endeared her- 
self to Emily and Lavinia by small but understanding attentions, in 
return for which Emily sent Mrs. Todd copies of her poems. At first 
approach neither Susan Dickinson nor Mrs. Todd felt qualified for 
the editorial task which they both were hesitant to undertake. Mrs. 
Todd says of Lavinia's discovery: "She showed me the manuscripts 
and there were over sixty little Volumes/ each composed of four or 

7 "I found, (the week after her death) a box (locked) containing 7 hundred 
wonderful poems, carefully copied - " Letter from Lavinia to Mrs. C. S. Mack, at 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, 17 Feoruary 1891 (quoted by permission of Mr. Julian E. 
Mack). 

8 In Ancestors* Brocades (New York: Harper, 1945), by Millicent Todd Bing- 
ham. The account of the editing by Mabel Loomis Todd as there presented by her 
daughter is frankly partisan, but it is documented from Mrs. Todd's diaries and 
from exchanges of letters between Mrs. Todd and her co-editor T. W. Higginson, 
and letters to and from the publisher, Thomas Niles of Roberts Brothers. It is 
therefore source material to which the following summary is indebted. 

xxxix 



INTRODUCTION 

five sheets of note paper tied together with twine. In this box she 
discovered eight or nine hundred poems tied up in this way." 9 

Whether Lavinia sought their aid simultaneously in those first 
weeks is not clear. She went impulsively from one house to the other, 
and probably was vague and very determined. Two things are certain. 
All the packets were taken to Sue during the summer of 1886 and 
remained with her well into the winter. During that time Lavinia was 
beseeching Susan to make a selection from them for publication. Sue 
mulled over the matter and discussed the poems with friends. Vinnie 
was frantic that Sue should need more time to reach a decision and 
sought Mrs. Todd's help. Mrs. Todd obviously could do nothing as 
long as Sue had the manuscripts. Pressed for a decision that winter, 
Sue, perhaps unable to make up her mind, and certainly reacting to 
old irritations which this new pressure of Vinnie's aggravated, allowed 
Vinnie to recover the manuscripts without in fact having come to an 
answer. By doing so she at least was freeing herself from Vinnie's 
importunity. 

Evidently in February 1887 Lavinia went to Mrs. Todd's house 
one evening, presumably with the poems in her hands. She pleaded 
with Mrs, Todd to take on the labor. Both Professor and Mrs. 
Todd seem to have been persuaded that Susan Dickinson had no real 
intention of undertaking the work, and then and there Mrs. Todd 
promised Lavinia that she would attempt it. Since both the Todds 
were leaving Amherst in March for Japan, whither Professor Todd 
was conducting an astronomical expedition, Mrs. Todd could not ex- 
pect to begin the work until their return. Plans matured in due course, 
and Mrs. Todd commenced the task of transcribing the poems im- 
mediately upon her arrival home in November 1887. Professor Todd 
lent assistance to his wife, especially at the start. He had the training 
in precision that prompted him, as soon as the packets and the en- 
velopes of loose sheets and scraps were delivered to them, to begin 
first of all by numbering them. Lavinia did not bring all the manu- 
scripts at once; she doled them out in batches which Mrs. Todd under- 
took to return as soon as she completed her transcriptions. With a blue 
9 Ancestors' Brocades, 17. 

xl 



EDITING THE POEMS 

pencil Professor Todd placed a number at the top of the first page of 
each packet and, as they later came into his house, on the envelopes 
containing the remaining manuscripts. His sequence goes i through 
40, 80 through no. A tabulation shows that numbers 1-40, 80-83 
are all threaded packets, that numbers 84-98 are packets of loose 
sheets prepared as if for threading. Beyond that point the grouping 
is miscellaneous, with no discoverable sequence except as the arrange- 
ments reflect Mrs. Todd's effort to produce a semblance of order 
among manuscripts that had in.fact no order at all. Mrs. Todd began 
copying systematically, starting with the poems in the packet that 
her husband had numbered one. In due course she progressed through 
packet number 40 a total of 665 poems. These from time to time as 
she completed transcriptions, she returned to Lavinia, in whose pos- 
session they remained until they were inherited by her heirs. Packets 
numbered 80 through 98, and the remaining worksheet drafts and 
scraps, continued to rest among the papers in Mrs. Todd's possession 
until her death in 1934, and still remain with them. 

There is no ready explanation why Professor Todd left a gap in 
his numbers, stopping at 40 and beginning again at 80. The record 
book survives wherein Mrs. Todd listed the first lines of all poems 
she knew about, except the worksheet drafts which comprise envelopes 
99-110. This list, together with the poems in the final twelve en- 
velopes, establishes the total of all poems known to have been among 
Emily Dickinson's papers at the time of her death. In the left-hand 
margin David Todd has penciled the number of the packet wherein 
the poem might be found. His numbers set down in the record book 
exactly correspond with the evidence of the packets: they range from 
i to 40, and from 80 to 98. They skip 41 through 79. The packet 
numbering was done solely by Professor Todd. He undertook it in 
the autumn of 1887 at the time Mrs. Todd began her labors of tran- 
scribing, and he continued intermittently as fresh batches of manu- 
scripts were placed in his wife's hands by Lavinia Dickinson. Since 
numbers 1-40 were all ultimately returned, and numbers 80 and up- 
ward were not, one suspects that the break in numbering represents 
a lapse in memory. There is not a shred of evidence that he or Mrs. 

xli 



INTRODUCTION 

Todd or anyone else so much as suspected the existence of further 
packets. Mrs. Todd's statement already quoted that Lavinia's box of 
threaded "volumes" contained "eight or nine hundred poems tied up 
in this way" would seem to confirm the existence of no more. The 
threaded packets, numbered 1-40, 80-83, contain exactly 879 poems. 

There can be no assurance that the packets through number 83 
the last to be threaded are in fact today grouped as Emily Dickinson 
originally assembled them. They have now all been examined with 
care, and some corrections within the packets effected. There are in- 
stances of two sets of thread holes in certain sheets, one set exactly 
corresponding with the thread holes of the sheets in the packets 
wherein they are now placed, the other set corresponding with the 
thread holes of another packet in which they may once have been 
placed. Since the packets have passed through many hands during 
the past sixty-nine years, there can be no certainty about the reasons 
for such a transfer. Some alteration conceivably may have been made 
by Emily Dickinson herself. 

In the recent study of the manuscripts certain sheets lying loose 
were found to belong within packets; others were transferred from one 
packet to another. In their new position the sheets exactly matched 
those into which they were moved. The stationery was of the same 
manufacture, with identical millimeter measurements. The ink and 
handwriting matched. Most significant of all, the thread holes not 
only corresponded, but the small rips in the stationery where the 
needle had pierced were identical in the shape of the tear. None of 
these features had been present before the transfer. But who made 
such alterations, or why, does not now seem discoverable. 

There is clear evidence that some of the packets were altered after 
Mrs. Todd had returned them to Lavinia. An instance can be cited 
from the confused publishing history of "I tie my hat" (no. 443). 
When it was first published in 1929, it lacked the final nine lines 
which are written on a separate sheet. Since the poem is there printed 
as six quatrains, it might be said that stanzas 7 and 8 are wanting. 
What happened is that at some period the sheet containing the first six 
quatrains was moved from packet 29 to packet 5. This transfer left 

xlii 



EDITING THE POEMS 

the last two quatrains facing, and apparently concluding, another 
poem: "A still volcano, life" (no. 60 1). This latter poem was also 
published in Further Poems, and Mrs. Bianchi concluded it with the 
final quatrain of "I tie my hat/' though unaccountably omitting the 
quatrain preceding (stanza 7). The displaced sheet, which corresponds 
in all ways with the other sheets in packet 29, and lacks correspond- 
ence with those in packet 5, must have been in packet 29 at the time 
Mrs. Todd transcribed the poem, for her transcripts of both poems 
survive, and both are correctly rendered. 

The principles that guided Mrs. Todd and Col. Higginson in 
their editorial procedure were those that he laid down, and they were 
dictated largely by standards of current literary taste. Thus the al- 
terations which occur in the three series of Poems were deliberate and 
conscientiously made in an effort, however misguided it seems in 
retrospect, to give the poetry of Emily Dickinson the sort of finish 
which the sensibilities of the time were thought to demand. 

Mabel Loomis Todd was just thirty years old when she began her 
editorial labors. From the start Lavinia had held the opinion that 
Colonel Higginson was the person whose sponsorship could give her 
sister's poetry literary respectability. Demur as he might, she would 
not take no for an answer, and whether her persistence or his timid 
but genuine interest won the day is a nice question. When first ap- 
proached, he told her that he was a busy man and had no reason to 
believe he could interest a publisher in the poetry. Mrs. Todd later 
recalled that "Though he admired the singular talent of Emily 
Dickinson, he hardly thought enough could be found to make an 
even semi-conventional volume." 10 But he was persuaded to consider 
the matter when he had been assured that someone else would take 
over the labor of going through the quantities of manuscript to win- 
now the wheat. Armed with this much encouragement, Lavinia won 
Mrs. Todd's consent to the task, and be it to Lavinia Dickinson's ever- 
lasting credit that her singleminded persistence won through. Mrs. 
Todd was well enough along with the work by the autumn of 1889 to 
consult with Higginson on the problem of selection. As a reader for 

10 Ancestors' Brocades, 18. 

xliii 



INTRODUCTION 

the firm of HoughtgnJ^lifflin, he was in a position to suggest to them 
the possibility that they might consider issuing a small volume of 
poems by the unknown writer. They considered and flatly refused. 
They had no interest in prospecting into the unknown when they 
already had lucrative investments in the works of such established 
poets as Longfellow, Holmes, Lowell, and Whittier. Mrs. Todd was 
sensitive to the fact that under the circumstances Higginson might 
hesitate to approach other publishers, so she herself in the following 
spring went to see Thomas Niles, editor of Roberts Brothers, another 
Boston firm, and one with a growing reputation for the quality of its 
books. The step was logical and wise in the light of Niles's previous 
interest in the Dickinson poetry, though Mrs. Todd could not have 
known that in 1883 Niles had tried to persuade the poet to bring out 
a volume of her verses. Niles agreed to the undertaking and accepted 
the poems, which he turned over for criticism to his literary appraiser, 
the editor and novelist Arlo Bates. Bates returned them to Niles with 
a detailed memorandum stating that the author had talent but no 
technique, and that there should be a much greater degree of selectiv- 
ity than the editors had exercised. "There should be few changes as 
possible," he said, "but some are absolutely necessary. . ." n Bates's 
suggestion about "necessary" changes was no vagary. It was the estab- 
lished editorial procedure which had beset Emily Dickinson all her 
life; the kind that had in fact stiffened her determination never to 
let her verses be published. Death did not release her from the incubus 
of good intentions. 

Niles forwarded Bates's memorandum to Higginson on June 10 
with a covering letter which, in view of Niles's urgent plea to Emily 
Dickinson seven years before to let him be her publisher, makes odd 
reading. He is willing to go ahead with publication if Lavinia Dickin- 
son will pay for the plates. "It has always seemed to me," he begins, 
"that it would be unwise to perpetuate Miss Dickinson's poems. They 
are quite as remarkable for defects as for beauties & are generally 
devoid of true poetical qualities." 12 Whatever the motive for this re- 
versal of judgment, the opinion surely confirmed Higginson's belief 

u Ancestors' Brocades, 53. ** Ancestors' Brocades, 53. 

xliv 



EDITING THE POEMS 

that the poems, before they could appear, would have to undergo the 
surgery which for twenty-five years he had been itching to administer. 

Higginson in his turn passed the memorandum on to Mrs. Todd, 
saying that he thought Bates's criticism was excellent and should be 
followed. At this point the creative editing began. Higginson gave his 
attention to the classification and the titles. He selected the rubrics 
for the sections with an eye to the conventionality that he intended 
the volume to convey, and grouped the poems in the categories of Life, 
Love, Nature, Time and Eternity. There is elegance but restraint in 
the Latin titles: "Astra Castra," "Numen Lumen/' and "Resurgam." 
But most were English titles, such as "Troubled with Many Things," 
and "Apotheosis." 

The summer of 1890 was advancing and the poems were to ap- 
pear in November. Hoping to cushion the shock that he feared the 
public was in for, Higginson prepared an article, incorporating four- 
teen poems, written to introduce the poet whose verses were about to 
be published. It appeared in the September twenty-fifth issue of the 
Christian Union, a literary-religious journal of respectability and wide 
circulation. The essay is some twelve hundred words in length, and 
however tentative in judgment and apologetic in tone, it is in fact the 
first critical identification of Emily Dickinson as a poet. 

The slender volume of Poems, one hundred fifteen in number, was 
published on November twelfth, and the numerous hostile reviews 
deepened Higginson 's assurance that his textual emendations in the 
direction of conformity had been wise. His editing, like his Christian 
Union article, was apologetic. It had attempted wherever possible to 
smooth rhymes, regularize the meter, delete localisms, and substitute 
sensible metaphors. It was carefully designed to spare the reader's se- 
sibilities by producing a maximum of decorum. 

Bates's advice that there "should be few changes as possible" was 
followed in such substitutions as "those" for "folks," and "weight" for 
"heft," which were made with the intent to protect the author from 
the^aij})^of>grovincialism. 18 The meter of the second line in the poem 

18 See 'Tm wife, I've finished that" (no. 199), and 'There's a certain slant of 
light" (no. 258). 

xlv 



INTRODUCTION 

"There's a certain slant of light/ Winter afternoons" could be very 
simply regulated by letting it read "On winter afternoons." But on 
occasion the repairs, once undertaken, went beyond the original in- 
tention. The editors wished to include "Because I could not stop for 
death," but felt it needed many improvements. One stanza was 
omitted, one rewritten to gain a rhyme and delete a localism, and an- 
other altered to smooth the meter. 

Higginson was disturbed by Dickinson's lack of grammatical con- 
vention. She had written "The grass so little has to do/ I wish I were 
a hay." "It cannot go in so," he told Mrs. Todd; "everybody would sa) 
that hay is a collective noun requiring the definite article. Nobod) 
can call it a hay!" 14 So the definite article was substituted. 

The problem that gave most trouble was Emily Dickinson's pre- 
dilection for what seemed to be a subjunctive mood when the indica- 
tive properly was called for. Her preference for an indefinite or con- 
tinuing present can be illustrated by the first stanza of one of the best 
known poems: 

I never saw a Moor- 

I never saw the Sea - 

Yet know I how the Heather looks 

And what a Billow be. 

In Higginson *s Christian Union article the last line became "And 
what the billows be." That change took care of the collective noun, 
but not the subjunctive mood. When Poems was issued in November 
the line was tailored to the form it has since retained: "And what a 
wave must be." 

To single out Higginson for special censure in thus bowdlerizing 
the text is unfair. His practice was ethical enough for any except 
learned publications, and would have been questioned only in matters 
of taste. Since his taste epitomized the best literary etiquette of the 
day, he had performed his labors with skill. What surprised every- 
body, the editors and publisher most of all, was the continuous de- 
mand for new printings, especially in the wake of so many unfavor- 

14 Ancestors* Brocades, 58. 

xlvi 



EDITING THE POEMS 



able reviews. And suddenly Higginson's whole attitude changed. A 
new volume of poems must indeed be published to meet the popular 
clamor. As he studied the unpublished poems anew, he began to think 
how much he really liked them and how good they really were. In 
April 1891 while he and Mrs. Todd were making selections for the 
Second Series planned for publication at the end of the year, he wrote 
her: "Let us alter as little as possible, now that the public ear is 
opened." 15 For this volume he assumed primary responsibility, and his 
name precedes that of Mrs. Todd on the title page. 

There is less attempt at wholesale emendation in the second vol- 
ume of Poems than the first. Higginson wrote Mrs. Todd in July: "A 
few of your suggested alterations I have evaded by a little change in 
order of her own words." 16 Such changes usually were made to effect 
rhymes. 

Unassisted, Mrs. Todd edited two volumes of letters in 1894. B) 
the time she was ready to prepare a third volume of poems in 1896 
Higginson, fully engaged in other matters, was already in his seventy- 
fourth year, and the work was entirely hers. She observed the same 
editorial principles employed earlier. Her transcripts survive for all 
the poems in the Third Series, and they are uniformly accurate. Bui 
she had been so long schooled in the Higginson methodology that in 
print she felt impelled to alter somewhat freely. 17 

No further poems appeared for eighteen years. By 1914 when The 
Single Hound was published, Emily Dickinson's public had reached 
out far beyond New England, and her verbal and metric irregularities 
were recognized as essential to the form and meaning of her poetry,! 
not wilful eccentricities. Therefore Martha Dickinson Bianchi, who 
edited this and several later volumes of poems, never felt under pres- 
sure to alter the text of a poem to smooth rhyme and meter. The text 
of The Single Hound is refreshingly accurate. But fifteen years later, 
when Mrs. Bianchi and Alfred Leete Hampson were preparing Fur- 
ther Poems, they came under the spell of a then prevailing fashion. 

"Ancestors' Brocades, 127. * Ancestors' Brocades, 138. 

"The degree to which she did so is pointed out by her daughter in Ancestors 1 
Brocades, 333-348; and in "Poems of Emily Dickinson: Hitherto Published only 
in Part," New England Quarterly, XX (1947)* 3~5o- 

xlvii 



INTRODUCTION 

Whereas the earlier editors had regularized five-line stanzas into 
quatrains, the present editors created irregularities to enhance the 
notion of quaintness. Unfortunately the text went to press with a 
startling number of misreadings. Some of them were later corrected, 
and many of the line spacings restored. The Dickinson handwriting 
presented a problem which Mrs. Bianchi never entirely mastered, so 
that even today many misreadings persist, such as "thyself" for 
"Thessaly," "holy" for "Hybla," and "hundreds" for "Hemlock." 18 

The unsystematic manner in which Emily Dickinson set down her 
suggested changes created difficulties. Occasionally such changes were 
adopted as substitutes for words other than the ones they were in- 
tended to match. The editorial confusion at the end of "I got so I 
could hear his name" is one which Dickinson made especially easy. By 
1929, when Further Poems was issued, several of the sheets in the 
packet were out of their proper order, and thus some poems were easily 
garbled. 19 The text of Unpublished Poems (1935), the last to be pub- 
lished by Mrs. Bianchi and Mr. Hampson, was somewhat more care- 
fully prepared. 

The publication of Bolts of Melody (1945), from texts prepared 
by Mabel Loomis Todd and Millicent Todd Bingham, marked a new 
era in textual fidelity. Out of the total of more than six hundred poems 
there printed, more than two-thirds derive from holographs which had 
remained among Mrs. Todd's papers, and the rest from transcripts 
made by Mrs. Todd. 

18 See "The world feels dusty" (no. 715), and "Doom is the house without the 
door" (na 475). 

19 See, for example, "I tie my hat, I crease my shawl" (no. 443). 



xlviii 













: _ : _ 

; - : ,,;*;: ^ ^ 



:v^^:fe - ; ;^i 

''^"'XVi^'fiff' rtt^i'V '-/;'-" t-- 1 ',''-' i-; r .j>'-'^:ir "i 1 _~ ~" "": " " .- ' Hj _" " -~ ' - " 

I'M^Cf!*^ t'"'^' 1 '"'^ '''%'' '""^'^' -'-'! t !" J ' 1 ^'!'"^ 1 - -" '''"- ' '*-' "-' " - """ - "- :''' - " 

!t't' l iif^ 1 '. 'V." ^Irfi'^l-t'I.v'.'r;' V| ,'1- ''-',' r - r ^'^''Ti'lv!' 1 ' 1 ; ' "-" l ", 1 - 1 . . ,._. , '-.'-"-_ -,i - 







1858. Number 49 



"- ir 1f ^ l l^l J^ [ j 





; ;- ~' f ; (th ',' r .' 1 , 'M';; * 
', ' "^' ; " s!; 1 \ k i 



ft* 



'* r^ 



rJi 



1859. Number 80 







1859. Number 80 



r l !,V. rf fr > t ' . ''!'' '^r'^.A'"'"^ 

-t^f^ i/ f 'w , r ** T ^*^ f ff ^"Xl^icS^M *^ i ,i 




Number 324 






:4W^j,; ! <MI?WP^*^^r; ; ,fr: -.. ,|1 ; 



i^m 






i ^* ffrw'i ir- f s^""* r r ^i | j/^^^ 7; f |B ^ ( J, 
i L J ' J^&J, 1 , 11 V 







,-p 
^ : MStM? 



f t" i 1 ! '.',,'> r- t [ "^ , ' ', I i-H 1 '-' i ' f : ' r :, s i"^^,.. <i*ti"5*"r 



1861. Number 2d6Tv- 



^ '-M/J' J ; ^' ,M '.' '/ 'i 

v.t/ ,,{,, ''U 1 



* -ti i 1 Mfl, r ' , r > , , f 

f ^^W^fV 1 Vr f *fr f r W ( 




1862. Number 449 




1863. Number 668 



-'fi. - ' 'f .'-i' '> i ; -i : v? ; ' ' ; "'' ' '. ' : . V 1 i 1 ' -i ' - \ ?:>;-< ' , ' ; 

' 




lilili:l:;?:^: : r^f"Sr;^ : 

^^M^^'^^^'&^iff^^^^^ ' ;''' '. 

I*'T,' r f f ( t > r " L f ij tl : ' u;i f j ' .'',, , ' 
- n' 't, f IH r I' .-.,}. '> '! L If 1! 1 i i '.. , , f 




^i^f^ 1 '-;^ 3 :; ,;M:V ;: -r 

J'> :!; ,.'-is '!<!::.:. ;- 



r;; ^ tr ;;n4^7!^ j /; ^ ^ ' V I ;,, , \ 

^;: IL , J , ^ I: M^ , r ' iiiilM^. >' :i .^'\ ^Mi-.n/ji/r' _',;V" 



1864. Number 907 



fov' 




1865. Number 988 










1866. Number 1067 



K:<-'^^^:>;' ,. r ':'/, .;" ( v ^>n, ( ;^'.f l''^ 









\iWfc. 



. V 'SS' 1 i".?; : ;i; 1 




;c : h < :/ 1 r ,' / -'i-c^i :.,-; 

*7fc$$$f?$$ 
^'^IWft 



^.i. 1 !.,, 1 -: /::.;>- : ' V': V:?.'. 'li:.:.V '^ii^ -' ^^M^(^m ^ 




' i ^ * ' , ir f i\^lg^ [ ^ ^'% 

*\0 &$&&? j 
1 




vS/;l' 

'/ V fe J "'^r 



1868. Number 1114 



: ^^;,-,^^/' ^*^|f 




:W ; ' L ^ < v- >-'.:,; ', 
f iv--'V:Vv,^; ;,^ ;",-' 

"jg*;. :,.,, ',, f -r* i ">-. ,,-;;' 



1870. Number 1156 







1872. Number 1209 



|M=*;- &5MW- <^ fi&U". ,r^?^ -to */'*Md55E2! 

^'i^Sl^^ 7 -^'^^ '-C-' ,''"'",'/, " i ''' : '\": 1 '' 1 , v ; '.'^v-' J'^'f/---' 



aSn M T ' i fi- ? i/* i -i v fij J ; 

*ISr/ ! *J\ ; i,y f ^ rS l \ \ ' n ! r / r , , 




*''-^X^^' f , 
vt^fe'V^fe'/'V " r " " k 

-v 

-^ ' 







1874. Number 1302 




i , If fl^**% > f i 'f '' t L ' *T J i ' i i' ' ' i 1 ^ *MkiLJw*i r* J C f 4 ^ ^fi > -^t r " rl ^jP" { 
'* C|^ P r i rff^^^**T ' f *tfW*M 4 f ' if* f r rt ,'i-t, |ri ^^i],' *t 




1876. Number 1353 



i ^-y^ j t *w// [" -^ *. ivw/fp, ,j^ t^ 1 ^-,, f ^^ji 1^,,-f. ^ 5 " 
ri ?^; r XVryW^^'^ Ai f? $, r>'- l i Ml "H r V > r f *.-*^)V 1 i '/'!./ f ; (| ; .,/, 



' ' 







^ t!V J' '; ^rr^^n 'V 'L , 'I ' ? i ^ "I, ^'''fri ^ ' , ' ' |J 'r ' ' ^ I l'" ' ^ !~ L 

m^m^^&^J- 




1877. Number 1416 



ffi^fii'.fifa'd^ 
v*fc<i^AffiK^ *tf , 



TO<! 

,^,^||/;j 



s-. - ( $%*$'* ' ' &,;<&>: ,t^:H 5^>^*^ 

^^' ' r ' .^ '-Tli* -' ^, f* l r lJ - i- X JjU *V ' ' ^ J 1 T, i r - f- ^ - 1 U ^, t , , n .^t ; ^ ,^ r, ^ 




^^l! 1 '^^ 

:, : ^V* j ^ -^ r \,ifs - lj ;v V''* ' ' '' '' ''y^'iv'^^ '^-^i^^ 



1879. Number 1459 








^Jf 






1 88 1. Number 1522 



W'fc" W-*w & < ' "^r'* : - - r T T 1 1 u*i 

'y^^'-^'rV'.^:^!;/^^'^^ 

I |^j ^^j'i i ; ;;;;, '^^.'rii^h.if^vf i * -;j 




; ; ; *.#'. f^ffir, ;j ; ; : , ;:;-',,,; i!||g^;;f g 



' : :;^'^' ;:!:: 

\\,^ r ^'\ 

\ 1 5C 1 ( 




^vv^ f ^Hm 



1883. Number 1567 



W'^TT*/ &s ' T/' rtv '", i^ \ , 



iviji/ fo .;; 




1884. Number 1606 



CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 
HANDWRITING 

The following notes attempt to describe the salient features by 
which Emily Dickinson's handwriting may be recognized in periods 
roughly comprised by the calendar years from 1850 to 1886. For the 
sake of brevity it has been necessary to omit the less noticeable fea- 
tures, as well as certain discrepancies in hastily written notes and work- 
sheets, and for the same reason a feature once described is not noted 
again as long as it continues in use. 

The reader will observe that the variations in the form of certain 
letters provide the principal key to this study. Such is particularly true 
in the 1850 decade, when frequent shifts occur from one form to an- 
other. A few striking changes in the i86o's and 1870*8 also give definite 
limits to the dating of manuscripts in which they appear. 

Another important factor from about 1860 to the mid-seventies is 
the gradual separation of letters, finally resulting in a resemblance to 
print, with each letter standing alone. After 1879, when the pen was 
abandoned and the pencil habitually used, the variations are less in 
form than in general characteristics such as size, slant, roundness or 
sharpness, and precise or loose formation. 

More than any other letter, d is significant as a means of recogniz- 
ing writing of a certain period. In the 1850*8 some of the variants re- 
mained in use for less than a year at a time, recurring again after an 
interval. The letter becomes important again from 1872 to 1879, when 
several shifts between two forms occur and the proportion between the 
two forms in use at a time varies from year to year. Almost equal in 
importance is y, always an unconventional symbol, passing through 
many phases. During the earlier years g parallels y in its variations, 
but reaches a final form in 1862 and remains essentially the same 

xlix 



INTRODUCTION 

thereafter. The open and closed forms of e are of interest after 1859, 
but since the proportion in use of the two sometimes differs in manu- 
scripts of the same time, they can only be counted on to indicate a 
trend during certain periods. 

Of the capitals, T is the most noticeable, especially from the late 
1850*8 to about 1868, when its triangular form is striking enough to 
enable the reader at a glance to place a manuscript within those years. 
A few capitals appear in special forms during the earlier years only, 
and important changes in H, V, and W occur in the 1870*5. Other 
variations peculiar to certain periods are described in the detailed notes 
for each year. 

Since no detailed description is given of the variations found in 
the writing of the worksheets, it seems best to call attention here to 
certain points of interest concerning them. In some cases the writing 
of the worksheet of a poem differs considerably from the fair copy, 
even though certain characteristics show that the two were written at 
about the same time. All the worksheets are in pencil, and a fair com- 
parison can be made only with other examples of pencil writing. In 
the years when the separation of letters had become habitual in fair 
copies of poems and notes to friends, many ligations are found in the 
experimental scraps and rough drafts of letters which were not in- 
tended for other eyes than the writers. In a few instances drafts which 
prove by other means than handwriting to have been written in the 
1880*5 appear at the first glance to have been written ten years earlier. 

This discrepancy evokes the question whether the script that was 
characteristic of the later years was the result of unconscious develop- 
ment or was deliberately cultivated for the sake of clarity or for some 
other reason. Evidence for this deliberate change is seen in the fact that 
from about 1868 to 1872 the pencil writing is found to have two or 
three trends occurring simultaneously. These trends have been traced 
by grouping the manuscripts that resemble one another and observing 
that each group develops progressively in regard to separation of letters 
and the use of certain forms. The final style seems to have resulted 
from the trend toward "book" writing which began during this period 
rather than from the earlier cursive style. The earlier manner, however, 
apparently persisted as the natural one to use in later years when the 

1 



CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HANDWRITING 

writer was jotting down her thoughts without regard to the appearance 
of the page. 

It is impossible to give more than the merest suggestion of the 
general appearance of the writing at any time. The reader will find 
the facsimiles of greater value for this purpose than any description, 
and will also find well illustrated in them many of the forms of letters 
and other characteristics to which these notes call attention. 

1850 

Several manuscripts dated by ED herself give us the opportunity 
of noticing the changes and inconsistencies in writing during the year. 
Certain constant characteristics, however, give us a basis for comparison 
with those of succeeding years. 

Lines even, writing small; capitals large in comparison with lower 
case; thick and thin strokes, especially in cross stroke of T. Almost all 
letters ligated. 

d: single stroke, ascender to right; early in year bending at angle, 

later curved. 

f : straight ascender, lower loop carefully closed. 

g and y: instead of forming a loop, descender returns upward at 

right. 

h: ascender hooked at top to left. 

/: made with double curve, loop leaning far to right. 

S : form intended to resemble S in print; large complete loop above, 

small, tightly curved below. 

1851 

Small; more slanting than 1850; capitals smaller. 

d: single stroke, ascender strongly sweeping to right; occasionally 

two strokes, round body and ascender separate. 

g: descender usually short, curved to left. 

h: ascender straight, only occasionally slightly hooked. 

y: various forms same as 1850, single down stroke, nearly straight 

or curved to left. 

S : open curves, not looped. 

li 



INTRODUCTION 
1852 

Medium slant, still small. Similar to 1851, but in transition shows 
several forms, some new. 

d: two strokes in initial and occasionally final positions; also one 

stroke with ascender to right. 

f : loop slightly open. 

I: single down stroke, curved to right at lower end. 

y\ initial descender returning upward to right; others curving 

back to right, with or without hook at end. 

G: might be confused with S or L double curve, with loop to 

right at top. 

T (and some F's) : exaggerated sweeping cross stroke. 



General effect freer, less cramped, though still small. Separations 
between letters in to, it, is. 

d: single stroke, ascender curving back to left. 

f (in of): two open loops like prolonged hooks. 

g: three forms short and straight, curving to left, or returning 

upward to right. 

y: initial like long, loose 8; others long sweeping curve to left. 

1854 

Appearance similar to 1853. The most striking change is in de- 
velopment of T and F as noted below. 

d: initial mostly two strokes; final one stroke, curving to left. 

g: three forms, the short and straight prevailing. 

y: three forms, the sweeping curve to left prevailing. 

F and T: both strokes curved, in some cases joined in one by up- 

sweep to left; heavy, sweeping cross stroke. 

W: peculiar to this year straight left down stroke, looped to left, 

crossing to form center of letter. 

1855 

Somewhat larger and more slanting. A new form of F appears, as 
described below. 

Hi 



CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HANDWRITING 

d: mostly two strokes, whether initial or final; a few finals one 

stroke. 

/ (in of) : lower hook shorter. 

g: three forms, one curved back to right. 

F: cramped appearance; made without removing pen from paper, 

down, up close to same line, curving right for cross stroke; separate 

dot or short dash, at right. 

T: straight down stroke, connecting curve up left to join long cross 

stroke. 

1856 

General appearance similar to 1855. A new form of A appears, as 
described below. 

d: two strokes for initial letter, one stroke for final; ascender to left. 

g: mostly long sweeping curve to left; a few short and straight. 

y : long sweeping curve to left. 

A: similar to lower case 0, rounded but not quite closed. 

G: more conventional form, with double loop to left of upright. 



There are no manuscripts of known date in this year. 

1858 

Very slanting; letters sharp, words spread more widely. 

d: two strokes for initial letter; for final the one-stroke d with as- 

cender to right reappears for a short time. 

h and I: hooked at top. 

T: the evolution of this letter, begun in 1855, continues toward 

a triangular form. 

1859 

Somewhat less angular and more regular than in 1858. New forms 

of e, retained from now on, are described below. 

e: until this year almost without exception a narrow loop; now 
two new forms in final letters one open, like E, the other like e 

liii 



INTRODUCTION 

in type. All three forms used in varying proportions in succeeding 

years. 

/ (in o/) : still more simplified straight line, loop omitted. 

T: definitely triangular, a form that is retained until 1868. 

1860 

Alignment of words less regular, letters in a word sometimes di- 
minishing in size toward the end, which gives an uneven effect to the 
page. No important changes in form. 

1861 

Noticeable change in appearance: letters elongated and uneven, 
as if written with excess of nervous energy. Strongly slanted. Tend- 
ency toward separation of letters, a few words of four or five letters 
being entirely unligated. Some capitals, such as A and C exaggerated 
in size. 

d: both forms used, one stroke form having ascender to left. 

e: all three forms used. 

g and y mostly straight. 

t: cross strokes often long and sweeping. 

1862 

Less agitated than in 1861, but writing remains tall, angular and 
strongly slanted. Separation of letters progresses: only about half the 
words wholly ligated. Hitherto there have been minor variations of P; 
a new form now appears, as described below, which is retained as 
habitual from now on. 

g: descender straight. 

y : three forms straight, long or short curves to left. 

P: two strokes, a long upright, often extending below the line, 
crossed by a free loop starting from left of upright. 

1863 

Appearance similar to 1862. Separation of letters about the same. 
d: almost all single stroke form, ascender to left. 
e: open form predominates. 

liv 



CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HANDWRITING 

F: mostly triangular, but a few examples are made with three 
separate strokes. 
T: triangular. 

1864 

Until this year most of the datable manuscripts have been in ink. 
In 1864 and 1865 they are mostly in pencil. Forms of letters are in gen- 
eral the same, but smaller and less angular. 

of: progressive simplification noted above has led to a symbol made 
with double loop for o, connected with a straight down stroke for f . 

1865 

Little change from 1864, but possibly more separation of letters, 
especially in pencil writing. 

1866 

Separation of letters more noticeable few words wholly ligated. 
Vowel combinations such as al, an, en, er, also ch y th, remain linked. 

1867 

No manuscript of proven date in this year. However, by studying 
the progressive separation of letters and general appearance, it has been 
possible to assign a few to this period. 

1868 

Little change in style since 1866, but there are more separations 
and the triangular T has disappeared. 

T: made with two strokes, the cross stroke often long, sweeping 
far to right. 

1869 

Progress in separation of letters continues. Many vowel combina- 
tions (an, en, etc.) now unlinked. Spaces between letters wider. Few 
changes in forms of letters occur from now on, but increasing im- 

Iv 



INTRODUCTION 

portance is given to placing of cross stroke of t, which in preceding 
years was usually at right of ascender. 

t: almost all squarely crossed, or above ascender. 

1870 

Little change in appearance or number of ligations from 1869. 
e: closed form now about equal in numbers with open form, which 
has predominated since 1863. 

1871 

Capitals are larger. Fewer ligations: some combinations still linked 
in 1869 now separated in half the number of examples. Manuscripts 
in pencil have fewer ligations than those in ink. 

e: closed form now predominates in pen writing. 

th : about one third separated. 

1872 

Occasional vowel combinations still linked. As separation increases, 
spaces between become wider and alignment more irregular. 
d: the two stroke form reappears in some initial letters. 
th: more examples separated than linked. 

1873 

Size and irregularity increasing. Extreme slant in pen writing, less 
in pencil, which is beginning to appear like purposeful use of printing 
forms. A few ligated combinations, such as be, H, occasional th. 

d: one stroke and two stroke forms about equal. 

e: closed form now used in pencil as well as ink. 

f : in ink still double hook; in pencil ascender a single straight line, 

descender looped. This does not apply to of symbol. 

1874 

Writing in ink reaches maximum size sometimes only one word 
on a line. 

/: form described above now used in pencil as well as ink. 

Ivi 



CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HANDWRITING 

l8 75 

Still large; very wide spaces between letters. Only an occasional 
ligation, except in th, which is about equally linked and separated. 
Marked difference betwen pen and pencil writing, the latter being 
smaller and more compact, less slanting. 

d: single stroke form used more often than double in ink; the re- 
verse in pencil. 
f : new form now habitual. 
y: more curved than straight in ink; the reverse in pencil. 

1876 

Pencil writing smaller, clearer, better aligned than ink, with wide 
spaces between lines. A new form of W appears, and of symbol begins 
to change. 

of: a few examples of separated letters, using f introduced in 1873. 

t: crossings show tendency to fall left of upright, especially with 

pencil. 

W: in preceding years sprawling, rounded at base, now occasionally 

pointed at base. 

1877 

No ligations except occasional th. Pencil writing gives effect of ex- 
ceptional neatness and careful spacing. A new form of H appears, 
used occasionally. 

H: hitherto made with two strokes by continuing upward from 
base to form cross stroke, now three separate strokes. 

1878 

No noticeable changes in pen writing; pencil writing a little freer 
and less precise as it becomes more habitual. 

t: cross strokes about half to left of ascender. 

W: pointed form well established. 

1879 

References from now on are to pencil writing, since beginning in 

Ivii 



INTRODUCTION 

this year the pen is almost entirely discarded. Appearance compact, 
letters rounded, slightly slanted. 

d: two stroke form, except for occasional final letter. 

y: usually curved, but short straight form also in use. 

1880 

Still small; ascenders and descenders short. A new form of V ap- 
pears. 

y: straight, except as initial letter. 

V: formerly rounded at base, now pointed. 

1881 

Little change from 1880, but effect slightly sharper, more slanting. 
t: cross strokes mostly to left. 

1882 

Slightly larger, more slanting. 

y: some curved back to right. Some initial letters have hook at 

upper end. 

1883 

Letters more elongated; sharper. 

a and o: curled up toward center. 

g: curved sharply back to right a peculiarity lasting only a few 

months. 

1884 

Early part of year similar to 1883. After June slant and irregularity 
increase as result of illness. Long and short letters often appear equal 
in size. 

f: ascender curled over at top. 

t: cross strokes erratic right, left, above. 

D: noticeable lengthening of first stroke. 

1885 

Further exaggeration of all characteristics described in 1884; letters 

Iviii 



CHARACTERISTICS OF THE HANDWRITING 

farther apart and irregular. Some capitals so loosely formed as to be 
almost undecipherable. 

1886 

Large, loose, and badly formed, showing physical weakness. 



lix 



NOTES ON THE PRESENT TEXT 

At the time of her death in 1886, Emily Dickinson left in manu- 
script a body of verse far more extensive than anyone imagined. Of 
the seven poems known to have been published in her lifetime, all were 
anonymous and most were issued surreptitiously. Today seventeen 
hundred seventy-five poems may be attributed to her. All except forty- 
one have been previously published. Of those unpublished, nineteen 
are holograph copies; the larger part survive in transcripts for the most 
part made by Susan Gilbert Dickinson, presumably of copies which 
Emily sent her, now lost. 

There are one hundred twenty-three published poems for which no 
autograph is known. Some were incorporated in letters that have been 
destroyed. Some may yet be recovered, though patient search has not 
yet located them. Nothing at all is known about the rest, which sur- 
vive in the fifty-three transcripts made by Mabel Loomis Todd, and the 
sixty-one transcripts made by Susan Dickinson. Mrs. Todd made tran- 
scripts of many hundreds of poems at the time she was editing them. 
Since it was her practice to return the autographs to Lavinia Dickinson 
when her transcriptions had been made, one must assume that those 
fifty-three missing autographs disappeared after they were returned. 
Throughout her life, Emily sent copies of her poems to Susan, and a 
very large number of those autographs are extant. One supposes that 
the missing originals of Susan's sixty-one transcripts were at one time 
in her possession. The fact remains that all trace of these one hundred 
eleven holograph copies has vanished. 20 

"There is some reason to suspect that the copies sent to Susan Dickinson were 
missing before her death in 1913. Her daughter Martha Dickinson Bianchi published 
The Single Hound. (1914), a volume of 143 poems, from copies in her possession. 
Holographs of 40 are missing today, but the texts of all but two of the 40 can be 
collated with surviving transcripts made by her mother. The reason for thinking the 
text of those 38 poems derived from Susan Dickinson's transcripts lies in the nature 
of certain printed errors. Susan's stylized handwriting is especially difficult to de- 
cipher. The following misreadings bear a striking resemblance to the form of the 
letters misread: 

lx 



NOTES ON THE PRESENT TEXT 

The purpose of this edition is to establish an accurate text of the 
poems and to give them as far as possible a chronology. Such of course 
can be done when holographs survive. The date (but not the literatim 
text) can be established when missing poems have been published in 
letters that can be dated from internal evidence. In all instances where 
holographs are wanting, the text derives from the most authentic 
source. 21 When no other source is known, the earliest published text 
is reproduced together with a record of later alterations if such were 
made. 22 The poems have been given a chronological arrangement even 
though at best it is but an approximation. Since very few poems can 
be given exact dates, any chronology must be considered relative. 

Where there is choice among texts for principal representation, 
the earliest fair copy is selected. Such a rule has exceptions. Within a 
given year the arrangement is in the following order: 

(a) fair copies to recipients 

(b) other fair copies 

(c) semifinal drafts but where the packet priority can be 

reasonably determined, the order of both (b) and (c) is 
subdivided in conformity with such priority 

(d) worksheet drafts 

If a poem seems to achieve its final version at a date later than that of 
earlier fair copies, it is placed among poems written during the later 



no. 1677: acre] area 

rocks] reeks 

no. 1682: At most'] Almost 
no. 1684: in] to 

there] Then 
no. 1701: their] this 

Untumbled] Untroubled 
no. 1703: more] mere 

21 There are instances where the absence of holographs requires speculation 
whether the text of a published poem reproduces a lost variant or is merely a mis- 
reading. A case in point is discussed in the notes to "Away from home are some and 
I" (no. 821). 

88 Transcripts made by Mabel Loomis Todd (referred to as TT) supply the 
text for 53 poems; transcripts made by Susan Gilbert Dickinson (referred to as ST) 
do so for 6 1.- A detailed identification of all missing poems is in Appendix u: "Dis- 
tribution of Missing Autographs." 

Ixi 



INTRODUCTION 

year. Texts which derive from undatable transcripts or published 
sources are perforce grouped together following all chronologically ar- 
ranged poems and their order is alphabetical by first lines. Such are 
the final one hundred twenty-seven poems, numbered 1649-1775. 

Except in instances where direct evidence in letters can be used 
to date a poem and they are relatively few all assigned dates are 
tentative and will always remain so. At the same time the quantity of 
manuscripts, both letters and poems, is great enough to provide op- 
portunity for a detailed study of handwriting changes. Such a study 
has been made, and the results are set forth, with facsimile illustration, 
in the section preceding. Manuscripts of known date have been a ma- 
jor factor in furnishing clues to the handwriting characteristics, from 
year to year, of poems and letters that cannot otherwise be dated. Taken 
together, the clues to dates furnished by direct evidence is fairly ex- 
tensive and has been used constantly as a check against the evidence of 
handwriting which, therefore, has a fairly high degree of reliability. 
In general the evidence of handwriting is sufficient to limit a date 
within a given year, and thus poems are identified as having been 
written "about 1860" or whatever the year may be. It must be assumed 
of course that such identification, in default of corroborative evidence, 
is only a calculated guess which may sometime be proved somewhat 
incorrect. 

Close study also was given to the stationery. The result of dividing 
and subdividing the paper according to manufacture and millimeter 
measurement led to no pattern that could be independently trusted. 
On occasion the evidence gave priority for a date to one batch of 
paper over another, but not enough to establish a conclusion. The use 
of evidence from stationery is ancillary and has always been explicitly 
stated when it is adduced. 

Spelling is always exactly rendered. Some misspellings the author 
carried through life with conscious relish for the sound of local idiom: 
Febuary, boquet, bretheren. Others she corrected over the years: Beth- 
leem, etherial, exhiliration, extasy, independent, vail (veil), witheld. 
Others appear only in the early manuscripts: boddice, nescessary, 
visiter. She constantly and correctly used the forms hight, nought, and 

Ixii 



NOTES ON THE PRESENT TEXT 

wo, which with equal consistency in publication have been regularized 
to height, naught, and woe. Her contractions are always written 
doesnt, dont, hasnt, havent, and wont. The possessive of it she in- 
variably spelled with an apostrophe: it's. She has the authority of the 
best established nineteenth-century gazetteers for the spelling Him- 
maleh, a word she seemed especially to like. 

The problem of reproducing her capital letters is complicated by 
the manner in which she formed them. Most are easily distinguishable 
because they do not resemble lower case letters. Others, especially A, 
C, M, N, U, and W, are simply enlargements, and decisions about 
them often have to be made on the basis of probability and familiarity 
with the text. She herself was arbitrary and inconsistent in her use of 
capitals; some poems use none within a line except for proper nouns; 
others are freighted heavily with them. Her mood dictated her choice. 

Her use of the dash is especially capricious. Often it substitutes 
for a period and may in fact have been a hasty, lengthened dot intended 
for one. On occasion her dashes and commas are indistinguishable. 
Within lines she uses dashes with no grammatical function whatso- 
ever. They frequently become visual representations of a musical beat. 
Quite properly such "punctuation" can be omitted in later editions, 
and the spelling and capitalization regularized, as surely she would 
have expected had her poems been published in her lifetime. Here 
however the literal rendering is demanded. 

Readers will be struck by the frequency with which her variants 
show that her line spacings and stanza divisions follow no pattern. 
Much of the irregularity clearly suggests a conscious experimentation. 
Some of it is indifference, as when in sending copies of a poem to two 
or three friends, she suits her punctuation, capitalization, and line ar- 
rangement to the mood of the moment. All such differences are noted. 

Emily Dickinson was not consistent in her manner of entering 
the suggested changes on her manuscripts. Sometimes they are placed 
between the lines, sometimes in the margin, and often at the end of 
the poem. Generally they are cued into the text by a cross placed 
against the word or phrase which they propose to supplant. In this 
edition all such alternative readings are placed at the end of the poem. 

Ixiii 



INTRODUCTION 

She indicated her emphasis on a word by the customary method of 
underlining it, and thus shows on occasion which of her suggested 
changes she prefers. All such words are here represented by italics. 

Her suggested changes are exactly rendered in this text. For exam- 
ple, in line i of poem number 626 she entered "Possess the Secret - " 
as a possible alternative for "detect the Sorrow/' This text cues all 
such words or phrases directly beneath the poem thus: 

i. detect the Sorrow] Possess the Secret - 

In the same poem the suggested change for line 8 is for the entire line, 
and therefore does not need to be cued to particular words. In poem 
number 627 her two suggested changes were intended for full lines, 
but in both instances she omitted the first word. Such omitted words 
are for convenience supplied in brackets. On occasions when she offered 
two or more suggested changes for a particular word, as those for line 
4 in poem number 616, this text records their exact form, but separates 
them by a short slanting stroke. 

Attention has already been drawn to the fact that all Emily 
Dickinson's worksheet drafts are in pencil, and her semifinal drafts 
and fair copies usually in ink until the late seventies. After 1 879 she 
gave up the pen entirely except to address envelopes. Of the many 
score of manuscripts written after 1879, on ty one a letter to Hig- 
ginson is in ink. In the textual notes, unless otherwise specified, the 
reader may assume that: 

(a) through 1879 all manuscripts are in ink 

(b) after 1879 all manuscripts are in pencil. 

Notes to the poems record first the manuscript date and location. 
Redactions and variants are reproduced and discussed, andjaUusions 
explained if they are known. Biographical sketches of recipients of 
poems, arranged alphabetically, are given in Appendix i. Publication 
data include information about first printings and subsequent print- 
ings wherever textual differences occur. Unless otherwise noted, 
poems first issued in a given collection were gathered and identically 

Ixiv 



NOTES ON THE PRESENT TEXT 

printed in all subsequent ones. 23 It is to be assumed that poems pub- 
lished in volumes of letters are not elsewhere collected unless the notes 
specify otherwise. 

The source of a published text is stated, and the variant readings 
and the misreadings recorded. The absence of such information implies 
that the published text accurately derived from the manuscript there 
reproduced, and was printed with the same line and stanza arrange- 
ment. Such changes as were made to regularize spelling, punctuation, 
and capital letters are passed over unless the alterations have affected 
the meaning of a poem. 

Readers can assume that in this edition poems breaking from page 
to page break at stanza divisions unless they see specified at the bottom 
of a page: "No stanza break." 

It is to be expected that autograph texts of poems, heretofore known 
only in a published version, from time to time will come to light. Such 
has happened during the years the present text has been in prepara- 
tion. In a few instances the information arrived too late to allow the 
poems to be placed in chronological order. The data for all such have 
been correctly supplied, but the order of the poems has perforce re- 
mained unchanged. Such is true of the following: numbers 330, 331, 
687,688, 1072, 1153, 1218, 1222, 1237, 1314, 1385, 1575, 1760, 1768, 
1770-1774. 



SYMBOLS USED TO IDENTIFY MANUSCRIPTS 

At the present time Dickinson manuscripts are located in sixteen 
institutions. No fewer than forty individuals are known to possess one 

23 The texts of all published poems have been collated, and variations recorded 
in the notes. The poems gathered in the three early series (1890), (1891), (1896), 
together with those in The Single Hound, were first collected in The Complete 
Poems (192.4)? with nve n ^w poems added: nos. 9, 310, 1072, 1467, 1545. The 
contents of The Complete Poems, together with those in Further Poems (1929), 
make up the text of the Centenary edition (1930), to which one new poem is added: 
no. 968. The contents of the Centenary edition plus the poems in Unpublished Poems 
Ci935)> constitute the text of the current edition of Poems by Emily Dickinson 

Ixv 



INTRODUCTION 

autograph or more. Individuals are named in the list of acknowledg- 
ments and identified by last name in the notes of the text. Institutions 
likewise are named in full in the list and briefly identified in the notes. 
Certain symbols are used throughout. In general the numbering of the 
manuscripts in the Harvard collection is in regular sequence follow- 
ing the letter H. In six instances it is broken down to indicate the 
provenance of the autograph or the category to which it belongs. 

AAS The American Antiquarian Society, Worcester, Mass. 

BPL Higg The Thomas Wentworth Higginson papers in the Galatea 

Collection, Boston Public Library 

H The Dickinson Collection in the Houghton Library, Harvard Uni- 
versity Library 

H B Manuscripts which had special association for Mrs. Bianchi 
H H Manuscripts presented to Harvard by descendants of Dr. and Mrs. 

Josiah Gilbert Holland 
H Higg Manuscripts presented by Thomas Wentworth Higginson or his 

heirs 
H L Letters formerly in the possession of Lavinia Norcross Dickinson 

or Susan Gilbert Dickinson or their heirs 

H SH Holographs in Mrs. Bianchi's own copy of The Single Hound 
H ST Transcripts of Emily Dickinson poems made by Susan Gilbert 

Dickinson 

TT Transcripts of Emily Dickinson poems made by Mabel Loomis Todd 
and now in the possession of her daughter, Millicent Todd Bingham 

The numbering of the manuscripts in the possession of Millicent 
Todd Bingham is that made many years ago in conformity with the 
system her mother used in making her transcripts and classifications. 
It is the arrangement which Mrs. Bingham has retained, and it is fol- 
lowed in this text. 

SYMBOLS USED TO IDENTIFY PUBLICATION 

The list below, including all collections of poems and letters, is 
alphabetical. A listing of first publication elsewhere than in collections 

Ixvi 



NOTES ON THE PRESENT TEXT 

is given in Appendixes 9 and 10. Full data in all instances are supplied 
in the notes to the poems. 

AB Ancestors Brocades. By Millicent Todd Bingham. New York: Harper, 
1945. 

BM Bolts of Melody. Edited by Mabel Loomis Todd and Millicent Todd 
Bingham. New York: Harper, 1945. 

CP The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Martha Dickin- 
son Bianchi and Alfred Leete Hampson. Boston: Little, Brown, 1924. 

Centenary edition. The Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Martha 
Dickinson Bianchi and Alfred Leete Hampson. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1930. 

FF Emily Dickinson Face to Face: Unpublished Letters with Notes and 
Reminiscences. By Martha Dickinson Bianchi. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1932. 

FP Further Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Martha Dickinson 
Bianchi and Alfred Leete Hampson. Boston: Little, Brown, 1929. 

LH Emily Dickinsons Letters to Dr. and Mrs. Josiah Gilbert Holland. 
Edited by Theodora Van Wagenen Ward. Cambridge: Harvard, 
1951. 

LL The Life and Letters of Emily Dickinson. By Martha Dickinson 
Bianchi. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1924. 

Letters (1894) Letters of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Mabel Loomis Todd. 
2 vols. Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1894. 

Letters (1931) Letters of Emily Dickinson. New and enlarged edition. 
Edited by Mabel Loomis Todd. New York: Harper, 



Poems (1890) Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Mabel Loomis Todd 
and T. W. Higginson. Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1890. 

Poems (1891) Poems by Emily Dickinson, Second Series. Edited by T. 
W. Higginson and Mabel Loomis Todd. Boston: Rob- 
erts Brothers, 1891. 

Poems (1896) Poems by Emily Dickinson, Third Series. Edited by Mabel 
Loomis Todd. Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1896. 

Ixvii 



INTRODUCTION 

Poems (current) Poems by Emily Dickinson. Edited by Martha Dickin- 
son Bianchi and Alfred Leete Hampson. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1937. 
SH The Single Hound. Edited by Martha Dickinson Bianchi. Boston: 

Little, Brown, 1914. 

UP Unpublished Poems of Emily Dickinson. Edited by Martha Dickin- 
son Bianchi and Alfred Leete Hampson. Boston: Little, Brown, 
'935- 



Ixviii 



POEMS 

1-494 
[1850-1862] 



Valentine week 



Awake ye muses nine, sing me a strain divine, 
Unwind the solemn twine, and tie my Valentine! 



Oh the Earth was made for lovers, for damsel, and hopeless swain, 

For sighing, and gentle whispering, and unity made of twain. 

All things do go a courting, in earth, or sea, or air, 

God hath made nothing single but thee in His world so fair! 

The hride, and then the bridegroom, the two, and then the one, 

Adam, and Eve, his consort, the moon, and then the sun; 

The life doth prove the precept, who obey shall happy be, 

Who will not serve the sovreign, be hanged on fatal tree. 

The high do seek the lowly, the great do seek the small, 

None cannot find who seeketh, on this terrestial ball; 

The bee doth court the flower, the flower his suit receives, 

And they make merry wedding, whose guests are hundred leaves; 

The wind doth woo the branches, the branches they are won, 

And the father fond demandeth the maiden for his son. 

The storm doth walk the seashore humming a mournful tune, 

The wave with eye so pensive, looketh to see the moon, 

Their spirits meet together, they make them solemn vows, 

No more he singe th mournful, her sadness she doth lose. 

The worm doth woo the mortal, death claims a living bride, 

Night unto day is married, morn unto eventide; 

Earth is a merry damsel, and heaven a knight so true, 

And Earth is quite coquettish, and beseemeth in vain to sue. 

Now to the application, to the reading of the roll, 

To bringing thee to justice, and marshalling thy soul: 

Thou art a human solo, a being cold, and lone, 

Wilt have no kind companion, thou reap'st what thou hast sown. 

P , [no stanza break] 



Hast never silent hours, and minutes all too long, 
And a deal of sad reflection, and -wailing instead of song? 
There's Sarah, and Eliza, and Emeline so fair, 
And Harriet, and Susan, and she with curling hairl 
Thine eyes are sadly blinded, but yet thou mayest see 
Six true, and comely maidens sitting upon the tree; 
Approach that tree with caution, then up it boldly climb, 
And seize the one thou lovest, nor care for space, or time\ 
Then bear her to the greenwood, and build for her a bower, 
And give her what she asketh, jewel, or bird, or flower - 
And bring the fife, and trumpet, and beat upon the drum - 
And bid the world Goodmorrow, and go to glory home! 

MANUSCRIPT: This valentine (Bingham 98-3-4), which is dated 
"March 4th. 1850.," was sent to Elbridge G. Bowdoin, a young bachelor 
practicing law in the office of Edward Dickinson. The six "comely maid- 
ens" who are named were probably Sarah Taylor, Eliza Coleman, Emeline 
Kellogg, Harriet Merrill, Susan Gilbert (who later married ED's brother 
Austin), and ED herself "she with curling hair." This is the earliest 
known poem by Emily Dickinson. It was presented by Bowdoin to Anna M. 
Kellogg, a sister of Rufus B. Kellogg who was graduated from Amherst in 
1858 and served as the first alumni trustee (1875-1885). Miss Kellogg in 
turn gave it to Lavinia Dickinson (see AB, 205-2,06). It is now in the 
possession of Millicent Todd Bingham. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (1894), 137-139; (1931), 136-138. Some but 
not all of the italics are reproduced. The name Sabra in the 1894 edition 
is corrected to Susan in the 1931 edition. There are a few minor changes 
in punctuation. 



There is another sky, 

Ever serene and fair, 

And there is another sunshine, 

Though it be darkness there; 

Never mind faded forests, Austin, 

Never mind silent fields - 

Here is a little forest, 

Whose leaf is ever green; [no stanza break] 

[a] 



Here is a brighter garden, 
Where not a frost has been; 
In its unfading flowers 
I hear the bright bee hum; 
Prithee, my brother, 
Into my garden come! 

MANUSCRIPT: These lines conclude a letter (Bingham), written on 17 
October 1851, to her brother Austin. ED made no line division, and the 
text does not appear as verse. The line arrangement and capitalization of 
first letters in the lines are here arbitrarily established. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 97; (ed. 1931), 95-96; also in LL 
(1924), 167. The letter is edited by Millicent Todd Bingham in Emily 
Dickinson's Home (New York, 1955). 

3 

"Sic transit gloria mundi," 

"How doth the busy bee," 
"Dum vivimus vivamus," 

I stay mine enemy! 

/"Vl ft 1 ! 

Uh veni, vidi, vici! 

Oh caput cap-a-pie! 
And oh "memento mori" 

When I am far from thee! 

Hurrah for Peter Parley! 

Hurrah for Daniel Boon! 
Three cheers, sir, for the gentleman 

Who first observed the moon! 

Peter, put up the sunshine; 

Pattie, arrange the stars; 
Tell Luna, tea is waiting, 

And call your brother Mars! 

Put down the apple, Adam, 

And come away with me, 
So shalt thou have a pippin 

From off my father's tree! 



I climb the "Hill of Science," 
I 'View the landscape o'er;" 

Such transcendental prospect, 
I ne'er beheld before! 

Unto the Legislature 

My country bids me go; 

I'll take my India rubbers, 

In case the wind should blow! 

During my education, 
It was announced to me 

That gravitation, stumbling, 
Fell from an apple tree! 

The earth upon an axis 

Was once supposed to turn, 

By way of a gymnastic 
In honor of the sun! 

It was the brave Columbus, 

A sailing o'er the tide, 
Who notified the nations 

Of where I would reside! 

Mortality is fatal - 

Gentility is fine, 
Rascality, heroic, 

Insolvency, sublime! 

Our Fathers being weary, 
Laid down on Bunker Hill; 

And tho* full many a morning, 
Yet they are sleeping still, 

The trumpet, sir, shall wake them, 
In dreams I see them rise, 

Each with a solemn musket 
A marching to the skies! 



A coward will remain, Sir, 

Until the fight is done; 
But an immortal hero 

Will take his hat, and run! 

Good bye, Sir, I am going; 

My country calleth me; 
Allow me, Sir, at parting, 

To wipe my weeping e'e. 

In token of our friendship 

Accept this "Bonnie Doon," 
And when the hand that plucked it 

Hath passed beyond the moon, 

The memory of my ashes 

Will consolation be; 
Then, farewell, Tuscarora, 

And farewell, Sir, to thee! 

St. Valentine -'52 

No autograph copy of this "Valentine" has been located. It is here re- 
produced from the Springfield Daily Republican of 20 February 1852. It 
is the first of seven poems known to be published in her lifetime. It is one 
of her earliest verses and certainly the longest. The valentines of the 1850*5 
were successful in proportion to the extravagance and elaborateness of 
their expression. Those written by ED held a special place in the minds of 
her contemporaries for their ornate drollery. This valentine was sent to 
William Howland 0822-1880), a graduate of Amherst College where he 
had recently been serving as a tutor. Whether he or another sent it to the 
Republican, the purpose of valentine exchanges was carried forward: to 
surprise the sender by a riposte and to keep up the badinage as long as 
possible. The verses are editorially prefaced thus: 

A VALENTINE 

The hand that wrote the following amusing medley to a gentleman 

friend of ours, as "a valentine," is c^abk^i^qting^y^^ 

and there is certainly no presumption in entertaining a private wish 

[5] 



that a correspondence, more direct than this, may be established 
between it and the Republican. 

One of the Monson, Massachusetts, relatives, Eudocia Converse a first 
cousin of ED's mother transcribed it into her 1848-1853 commonplace 
book, with the notation "Valentine by Miss E Dickinson of Amherst." The 
knowledge of her authorship clearly was abroad. One word differs: 

50. dreams] streams 

It could easily have been a misreading of ED's initial "d" as she formed 
them at that time, and strongly suggests that she transcribed it from a 
manuscript copy if not ED's then another's rather than from the Repub- 
lican. 

PUBLICATION: Its initial publication has been discussed. It is also in 
Letters (ed. 1894), 140-142; (ed. 1931), 138-141; and in LL (1924), 
147-149. The text follows the Republican version except for four altera- 
tions: 

n. gentleman] gentlemen 46. Laid] Lay 

19. shalt] shall 50. dreams] dream 



4 

On this wondrous sea 
Sailing silently, 
Ho! Pilot, ho! 
Knowest thou the shore 
Where no breakers roar- 
Where the storm is oer? 

In the peaceful west 
Many the sails at rest- 
The anchors fast- 
Thither I pilot thee- 
Land Ho! Eternity! 
Ashore at last! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies. That reproduced above 
(H B 73) was sent as a message to Sue in March 1853, when she was 
visiting in Manchester, New Hampshire. Headed 'Write! Comrade, 

[6] 



write!/' it is evidently a note asking for a letter. It is in pencil, addressed 
"Susie-" and signed "Emilie-." Sue made two transcripts of it One re- 
produces the complete text but misread the heading as 'Wait Comrade 
Wait!" (H ST 230). Sue dated it 1848. Her other transcript (H ST 24) 
is identical in text except that the heading and the first three lines are 
wanting; it is not dated. On ED's holograph above Mrs. Bianchi wrote: 

The first verse Aunt Emily sent to Mamma (She thought when 
both were sixteen or so ) 

The later copy, written about 1858, ED transcribed into packet 82 (Bing- 
ham i5e): 

On this wondrous sea -Sailing silently - 

Ho! Pilot! Ho! 

Knowest thou the shore 

Where no breakers roar- 

Where the storm is o'er- 

In the silent West 
Many -the Sails at rest- 
The Anchors fast. 
Thither I pilot thee - 
Land! Ho! Eternity! 
Ashore at last! 

One word is variant: 

7. peaceful] silent 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 200, titled "Eternity." The text derives 
from the packet copy. Two words are altered: 

8. the] omitted 9. The] Their 

Though not printed in LL (1924), it is referred to (pages 78-79) as a 
poem "sent to Susan in 1 848 when she was but eighteen. . ." 



I have a Bird in spring 
Which for myself doth sing- 
The spring decoys. 
And as the summer nears- 
And as the Rose appears, 
Robin is gone. 

[7] 



Yet do I not repine 
Knowing that Bird of mine 
Though flown - 
Learneth beyond the sea 
Melody new for me 
And will return. 

Fast in a safer hand 

Held in a truer Land 

Are mine - 

And though they now depart 

Tell I my doubting heart 

They're thine. 

In a serener Bright, 

In a more golden light 

I see 

Each little doubt and fear 

Each little discord here 

Removed. 

Then will I not repine, 

Knowing that Bird of mine 

Though flown 

Shall in a distant tree 

Bright melody for me 

Return. 

MANUSCRIPT: Early in September 1854, in an unpublished letter to Sue 
(H L 17) beginning: "Sue- You can go or stay. . ." 

PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 181-182 the poem only, for the letter is 
omitted. Two words are altered: 

3. decoys] always 13. safer] softer 

A variant of the second stanza, printed as prose, is in Letters (ed. 1894), 
162; (ed. 1931), 159; also LL (1924), 188 a concluding paragraph in a 
letter to Dr. and Mrs. J. G. Holland. It there reads: "Then will I not re- 
pine, knowing that bird of mine, though flown learneth beyond the sea, 
melody new for me, and will return/' It is dated in these printings "Late 

[8] 



Autumn, 1853." I n LH (1951), 38, where it has been reprinted among 
the other Holland letters, the suggested period assigned is early 1854 3 
more probable date. 



Frequently the woods are pink-- 

Frequently are brown. 

Frequently the hills undress 

Behind my native town. 

Oft a head is crested 

I was wont to see- 

And as oft a cranny 

Where it used to be - 

And the Earth -they tell rm 

On it's Axis turned! 

Wonderful Rotation! 

By but twelve performed! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about-x8^S, and both fair 
copies. The copy evidently sent to Sue (H 255) is reproduced above. The 
copy in packet 82 (Bingham i2b) is identical in text. It has minor differ- 
ences in form: there is a comma after "Frequently" (line 2), dashes are at 
the end of lines 4 and 1 1 , and "rotation" (line 1 1 ) is not capitalized. In line 
9 of the copy to Sue, ED scratched out "world" and substituted "Earth." 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 157. It derives from the packet copy and 
is arranged as three quatrains. The italics are not retained. 



7 

The feet of people walking home 
With gayer sandals go 
i The Crocus - till she rises 
The Vassal of the snow 
The lips at Hallelujah 
Long years of practise bore 
Till bye and bye these Bargemen 
Walked singing on the shore. 

[9] 



Pearls are the Diver's farthings 
Extorted from the Sea 
Pinions - the Seraph's wagon 
Pedestrian once - as we - 
Night is the morning's Canvas 
^Larceny - legacy - 
Death, but our rapt attentior 
To Immortality. 

f My figures fail to tell me 

How far the Village lies 

Whose peasants are the Angels - 

Whose Cantons dot the skies - 

My Classics vail their faces - 

My faith that Dark adores - 
; Which from it's solemn abbeys 

Such resurrection pours. 

! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are three autograph copies of this poem, all writ- 
ten about 1858. The copy reproduced above is in packet 10 (H 45). The 
second is in packet 82 (Bingham i4b). The third (H 334), possibly sent 
to Sue, is on a half-sheet roughly torn at the spine and is without address 
or signature, but it has been folded as if enclosed in an envelope. All three 
copies are identical in text. The second and third copies have dashes at 
the end of lines 9, u, 13, and exclamation points at the end of line 24; in 
both, "immortality" (line 16) is not capitalized. In the second copy there 
is a dash at the end of lines 3 and 6, a comma after "bye and bye" (line 7), 
and a dash after "Death" (line 15). In the third copy, "legacy" (line 14) is 
underlined. In the second copy line 8 reads: "Walked singing - on the 
shore"; in the third copy it reads: "Walked singing, on the shore!" 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 90-91. Two words are altered: 

2. With] In 12. Pedestrian] Pedestrians 

The text is so reproduced in CP (1924). In the Centenary edition (1930) 
and later collections a further alteration is made: 

5. at] of 



[10] 



8 

| There is a word 

I Which bears a sword 

Can pierce an armed man - 

It hurls it's barbed syllables 
' And is mute again - 

But where it fell 

The saved will tell 

On patriotic day, 

Some epauletted Brother 

Gave his breath away. 

Wherever runs the breathless sun - 
Wherever roams the day- 
There is it's noiseless onset - 
There is it's victory! 
' Behold the keenest marksman! 
The most accomplished shot! 
Time's sublimest target 
Is a soul "forgot!" 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, identical in text, both written about 
1858. The copy reproduced above is in packet 80 (Bingham la). The other 
copy (H 349) is addressed "Sue-" and signed "Emily-"; line 10 is con- 
cluded with an exclamation point, and line 1 5 with a dash. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 83, titled "Forgotten." One word is altered: 

5. And] At once 



Through lane it lay-r thro' bramble i 
Through clearing and thro' wood- 
Banditti often passed us 
Upon the lonely road. 

The wolf came peering curious - 
The owl looked puzzled down - 
jThe serpent's satin figure 
Hid stealthily along- 



F 



The tempests touched our garments - 
The lightning's poinards gleamed - 
PiefceTfom me Crag above us 
The hungry Vulture screamed - 

The satyrs fingers beckoned 
The valley murmured "Come" - 
These were the mates - 
This was the road 
These children fluttered home. 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above is in packet 80 (Bingham 
ib), written about 1858; it is identical in text with the copy (H 359) 
addressed "Sue-" and signed "Emily-": 

Thro' lane it lay -thro 1 bramble - 

Thro* clearing, and thro* wood- 

Banditti often passed us 

Upon the lonely road- 

The wolf came peering curious - 

The owl looked puzzled down - 

The Serpent's satin figure 

Glid stealthily along - 

The tempests touched our garments - 

The Lightning's poinards gleamed - 

Fierce from the crag above us 

The hungry Vulture screamed - 

The Satyr's fingers beckoned - 

The Valley murmured "Come" - 

These were the mates - 

This was the road 

These Children fluttered home. 

PUBLICATION: CP (1924), 297-298. Though the text derives from the 
copy to Sue, it is arranged as four quatrains. One word is altered: 

5. peering] purring 

Line 15 reads: 

These were the mates and this the road 



[12] 



10 

My wheel is in the dark! 
I cannot see a spoke 
Yet know it's dripping feet 
Go round and round. 

My foot is on the Tide! 
An unfrequented road- 
Yet have all roads 
A clearing at the end - 

Some have resigned the Loom- 
Some in the busy tomb 
Find quaint employ- 

Some with new -stately feet- 
Pass royal thro* the gate - 
Flinging the problem back 
At you and I! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1858. The text of 
the copy in packet 80 (Bingham 4a), reproduced above, is identical with 
that in the copy to Sue (H 291) below. The latter, with a different stanza 
and line arrangement, has been folded as if enclosed in an envelope. 

My wheel is in the dark. 
I cannot see a spoke- 
Yet know it's dripping feet 
Go round and round. 

My foot is on the Tide 
An unfrequented road 
Yet have all roads 
A "Clearing" at the end. 

Some have resigned the Loom- 

Some-in the busy tomb 

Find quaint employ. 

Some with new -stately feet 

Pass royal thro' the gate 

Flinging the problem back at you and I. 



ha! 



PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 19. The text derives from the copy to Sue. 
In SH and in CP (1924) the text is accurately rendered. In later collec- 
tions the last word is altered: 

lime 



II 

I never told the buried gold 
Upon the hill -that lies- 
I saw the sun - his plunder done 
Crouch low to guard his prize. 

He stood as near 

As stood you here - 

A pace had been between 

Did but a snake bisect the brake 

My life had forfeit been. 

That was a wondrous booty - 
I hope twas honest gained. 
Those were the fairest ingots 
That ever kissed the spade! 

Whether to keep the secret - 
Whether to reveal - 
/Whether as I ponder 
"Kidd" will sudden sail- 

Could a shrewd advise me 
We might e'en divide - 
Should a shrewd betray me - 
Atropos decide! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1858. The copy re- 
produced above is in packet i (H 33). The copy below (H 273), without 
address or signature, presumably was sent to Sue. 

I never told the buried gold 
Upon the hill that lies- 
I saw the sun, his plunder done - 
Crouch low to guard his prize - 

[Ml 



He stood as near 

As stood you here - 

A pace had been between - 

Did but a snake bisect the brake 

My life had forfeit been. 

That was a wondrous booty - 
I hope 'twas honest gained - 
Those were the fairest ingots 
That ever kissed the spade. 

Whether to keep the secret - 
Whether to reveal - 
: Whether while I ponder 
Kidd may sudden sail- 

Could a shrewd advise me 
We might e'en divide - 
Should a shrewd betray me- 
"Atropos" decide 

It is variant in lines 16, 17, and 20. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 48-49. The second stanza is regularized to 
four lines. The text follows the copy to Sue; "betray" is not italicized. One 
word is altered: 

12. fairest] finest 



12 

The morns are meeker than they were - 
The nuts are getting brown - 
The berry's cheek is plumper - 
The Rose is out of town. 

The Maple wears a gayer scarf - 
The field a scarlet gown - 
Lest I sh'd be old fashioned 
I'll put a trinket on. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1858. That repro- 
duced above (H 43) is in packet i. The other (H 344), signed "Emilie-," 
was probably sent to Sue. It has been folded as if enclosed in an envelope, 
and slit and laced with a ribbon knot which once held a flower. The copies 



are identical in text and form except that the copy to Sue has a dash at 
the end of line 4, one after "field" (line 6), and an exclamation point at 
the end of line 8. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 102, titled "Autumn." 



'3 

Sleep is supposed to be 

By souls of sanity 

The shutting of the eye. 

Sleep is the station grand 
Down wh', on either hand 
The hosts of witness stand! 

Morn is supposed to be 
By people of degree 
The breaking of the Day. 

Morning has not occurred! 

That shall Aurora be - 
East of Eternity - 
One with the banner gay- 
One in the red array - 
That is the break of Day! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, identical in text, both written about 
1858. The copy reproduced above is in packet i (H 4d). The copy below 
(H B 127) was sent to Sue. 

Sleep is supposed to be 
By souls of sanity - 
The shutting of the eye. 

Sleep is the station grand 
Down wh 1 on either hand - 
The Hosts of Witness stand! 

Morn is supposed to be 
By people of degree - 
The breaking of the Day! 

[16] 



Morning has not occurred! 

That shall Aurora be 
East of Eternity! 
One with the banner gay, 
One in the red array - 
That is the Break of Day! 

This copy is introduced by a note: 

To my Father 

to whose untiring efforts in my behalf, I am indebted for my morn- 
ing-hours -viz 3. A M. to 12. P M. these grateful lines are in- 
scribed by his aff 

Daughter. 

Mrs. Bianchi says (FF, 226) that they were addressed to Sue "and sent to 
her in fun apropos of her father's hobby of their early rising. . ." 

PUBLICATION: The packet copy furnished the text published in Poems 
(1890), 150. The italics are not retained and the lines are arranged as 
five three-line stanzas. The copy to Sue is in FF (1932), 226-227, and the 
lines here also are arranged as five three-line stanzas. In FF one word is 
altered: 

7. Morn] Noon 



'4 

One Sister have I in our house, 
And one, a hedge away. 
There's only one recorded, 
But both belong to me. 

One came the road that I came- 
And wore my last year's gown 
The other, as a bird her nest, 
Builded our hearts among. 

She did not sing as we did- 
It was a different tune- 
Herself to her a music 
As Bumble bee of June. 

[17] 



Today is far from Childhood - 
But up and down the hills 
I held her hand the tighter - 
Which shortened all the miles- 

And still her hum 
The years among, 
Deceives the Butterfly; 
Still in her Eye 
The Violets lie 
Mouldered this many May. 

I spilt the dew - 

But took the morn - 

I chose this single star 

From out the wide nights numbers - 

Sue forevermore! 

MANUSCRIPT: Late 1858. It is the copy sent to Sue, signed "Emilie-," 
and is pasted into Martha D. Bianchi's own copy of The Single Hound 
now in Houghton Library (H SH i). Austin and Sue were married i July 
1856 and moved into the house which Edward Dickinson had built for 
them on adjoining property. The lines were perhaps sent as a birthday 
greeting, 19 December 1858. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 1-2, headed "To Sue" and signed "Emilie." 
In later collections the heading is deleted and the signature is altered to 
"Emily." The poem is printed as six quatrains. One word is altered: 

5. road] way 

15 

The Guest is gold and crimson - 
An Opal guest and gray 
Of Ermine is his doublet - 
His Capuchin gay- 

He reaches town at nightfall - 

He stops at every door- 

Who looks for him at morning [no stanza break] 

[18] 



I pray him too -explore 
The Lark's pure territory - 
Or the Lapwing's shore! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two autograph copies, both written about 
1858. That reproduced above is in packet 80 (Bingham ic). A variant 
addressed "Sue" and signed "Emilie-" is tided "'Navy 1 Sunset!": 

The guest is gold and crimson, 
An Opal guest, and gray- 
Of Ermine is his doublet, 
His Capuchin gay, 
He comes to town at nightfall, 
He stops at every door- 
Who looks for him at morning, 
I pray him too -explore 
The Lark's pure territory, 
Or the Lapwing's shore! 

One word differs: 

5. reaches] comes to 

PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 185. It derives from the copy to Sue; the 
italics are not reproduced. 



16 

I would distil a cup, 
And bear to all my friends, 
Drinking to her no more astir, 
By beck, or burn, or moor! 

No autograph copy of this poem is known. It is incorporated in a letter 
to Samuel Bowles, and the "her" is probably summer. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 192; (ed. 1931), 183; also LL 
(1924), 203, printed as prose. Mrs. Todd conjecturally dates it late August, 
1858. 



17 

Baffled for just a day or two- 
Embarrassed-not afraid- [no stanza break] 



Encounter in my garden 
An unexpected Maid. 

She beckons, and the woods start- 
She nods, and all begin - 
Surely, such a country 
I was never in! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, identical in text, both written late in 
1858. The copy reproduced above is in packet 80 (Bingham 4?). The other 
fair copy, signed "Emilie," was sent to Mrs. J. G. Holland (H H 14); a 
rosebud is still tied to it by a ribbon attached through slits in the paper. 

Baffled for just a day or two- 

Embarrassed - not afraid- 

Encounter in my garden 

An unexpected Maid! 

She beckons, and the Woods start - 

She nods, and all begin - 

Surely -such a country 

I was never in! 

PUBLICATION: The packet copy furnished the text in BM (1945), 47. 
The copy to Mrs. Holland is reproduced in LH (1951), 64, where it is 
provisionally dated 1860. 

18 

The Gentian weaves her fringes - 
The Maple's loom is red 
My departing blossoms 
Obviate parade. 

A brief, but patient illness - 

An hour to prepare, 

And one below, this morning 

Is where the angels are- 

It was a short procession, 

The Bobolink was there - 

An aged Bee addressed us - 

And then we knelt in prayer- [no stanza foreafe] 

[20] 



We trust that she was willing - 
We ask that we may be. 
Summer - Sister - Seraph! 
Let us go with thee! 

In the name of the Bee - 
And of the Butterfly - 
And of the Breeze -Amen! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i2a) 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 170-171, titled "Summer's Obsequies." 
Lines 5-16 are arranged as three quatrains. 



19 

A sepal, petal, and a thorn 
Upon a common summer's morn - 
A flask of Dew -A Bee or two- 
A Breeze -a caper in the trees - 
And I'm a Rose! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i2c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 114, titled "A Rose." The text is ar- 
ranged as a six-line stanza. One word is altered: 

3. flask] flash 

20 

Distrustful of the Gentian - 
And just to turn away, 
The fluttering of her fringes 
Chid my perfidy - 

Weary for my 

I will singing go- 

I shall not feel the sleet- then - 

I shall not fear the snow. 

Flees so the phantom meadow 

Before the breathless Bee- [no stanza break] 

[21] 



So bubble brooks in deserts 
On Ears that dying lie- 
Burn so the Evening Spires 
To Eyes that Closing go- 
Hangs so distant Heaven - 
To a hand below. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i2d). The dash in 
the fifth line may suggest that ED intended the packet copy as a prototype, 
the blank to be filled in with whatever name was appropriate if she en- 
closed a copy of the poem to a friend. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 323-324. 



21 

We lose -because we win- 
Gamblers - recollecting which 
'Toss their dice again! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i2e). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 271. The text is arranged as a quatrain. 



22 

All these my banners be. 
I sow my pageantry 
In May- 

It rises train by train - 
Then sleeps in state again - 
My chancel -all the plain 
Today. 

To lose -if one can find again - 

To miss -if one shall meet- 

The Burglar cannot rob- then - 

The Broker cannot cheat. 

So build the hillocks gaily 

Thou little spade of mine [no stanza break] 



Leaving nooks for Daisy 
And for Columbine - 
You and I the secret 
Of the Crocus know- 
Let us chant it softly 
"There is no more snow!" 

To him who keeps an Orchis' heart - 
The swamps are pink with June. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham iif). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 45. These three stanzas or sections are 
printed and indexed as three poems numbered 75, 76, 77. The middle 
section is arranged into three quatrains. A note accompanying them says 
that ED may have thought of them "as parts of one poem, since she wrote 
them all on one page without her usual marks of separation." Such is 
probably the case. 



I had a guinea golden - 

I lost it in the sand - 

And tho* the sum was simple 

And pounds were in the land 

Still, had it such a value 

Unto my frugal eye - 

That when I could not find it- 

I sat me down to sigh, 

I had a crimson Robin - 

Who sang full many a day 

But when the woods were painted, 

He, too, did fly away- 

Time brought me other Robins - 

Their ballads were the same- 

Still, for my missing Troubadour 

I kept the "house at hame." 



I had a star in heaven - 
One "Pleiad" was it's name 
And when I was not heeding, 
It wandered from the same. 
And tho' the skies are crowded - 
And all the night ashine- 
I do not care about it- 
Since none of them are mine. 

My story has a moral - 
I have a missing friend - 
"Pleiad" it's name, and Robin, 
And guinea in the sand. 
And when this mournful ditty 
Accompanied with tear- 
Shall meet the eye of traitor 
In country far from here- 
Grant that repentance solemn 
May seize upon his mind- 
And he no consolation 
Beneath the sun may find. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 32-33, titled "I Had a Guinea Golden." 
Mrs. Todd's footnote in the 1896 edition (not retained in later collected 
editions) conjectures: "This poem may have had, like many others, a per- 
sonal origin. It is more than probable that it was sent to some friend travel- 
ling in Europe, a dainty reminder of letter-writing delinquencies." 



24 

There is a morn by men unseen - 
Whose maids upon remoter green 
Keep their Seraphic May- 
And all day long, with dance and game, 
And gambol I may never name - 
Employ their holiday. 



Here to light measure, move the feet 
Which walk no more the village street 
Nor by the wood are found - 
Here are the birds that sought the sun 
When last year's distaff idle hung 
And summer's brows were bound. 

Ne'er saw I such a wondrous scene 
Ne'er such a ring on such a green 
Nor so serene array 
As if the stars some summer night 
Should swing their cups of Chrysolite - 
And revel till the day 

Like thee to dance -like thee to sing- 
People upon that mystic green 
I ask, each new May Morn. 
I wait thy far, fantastic bells - 
Announcing me in other dells - 
Unto the different dawn! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 2,22223. 



She slept beneath a tree- 
Remembered but by me. 
I touched her Cradle mute- 
She recognized the foot- 
Put on her carmine suit 
And see! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: Poems 0896), 102, titled "The Tulip." 



26 

It's all I have to bring today - 
This, and my heart beside - 
This, and my heart, and all the fields - 
And all the meadows wide - 
Be sure you count -sh'd I forget 
Some one the sum could tell - 
This, and my heart, and all the Bees 
Which in the Clover dwell. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i4c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), v. 



Morns like these - we parted - 
Noons like these - she rose - 
Fluttering first -then firmer 
To her fair repose. 

Never did she lisp it - 

It was not for me 

She -was mute from transport 

I -from agony 

Till the evening nearing 
One the curtains drew- 
Quick! A Sharper rustling! 
And this linnet flew! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i4d). 

PUBLICATION: The first stanza concludes the obituary notice written 
by Susan Dickinson and printed in the Springfield Republican, 18 May 
1886, on the day before Emily was buried. The complete poem was pub- 
lished in Poems (1891), 186. Two lines show variants, which may indicate 
that the published version derived from a different copy: 

6. It was] And 'twas 10. curtains] shutters 

[26] 



28 

So has a Daisy vanished 
From the fields today - 
So tiptoed many a slipper 
To Paradise away 

Oozed so in crimson bubbles 
Day's departing tide - 
Blooming - tripping - flowing 
Are ye then with God? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham 146). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 195. 



29 

If those I loved were lost 
The Crier's voice w'd tell me- 
If those I loved were found 
The bells of Ghent w'd ring - 
Did those I loved repose 
The Daisy would impel me. 
Philip -when bewildered 
Bore his riddle in! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1858. The copy in 
packet 82 (Bingham 1 53) is reproduced above. There is also the worksheet 
draft (Bingham 98-4A-2): 

If those I loved were lost the criers 

voice would tell me 

ne'er? would 

If those I loved were found the bells of 

Ghent would ring. 

Did those I loved repose, The 

Daisy would impel me Philip 

questioned eager 

1, my riddle bring when bewildered 

bore his riddle in- 

It seems possible that this poem owes its inspiration to the very popular 



verse play Philip van Artevelde (1834), by Sir Henry Taylor. Among the 
Dickinson books at Harvard is an 1835 edition of it, published in Boston. 
It was owned by Austin and bears his label: "Wm. A. Dickinson/' In the 
same collection is an 1863 edition inscribed in pencil "Emily." Evidently it 
was an especially favored piece of literature in the Dickinson family. The 
story of Philip van Artevelde (c. 1340-1382), who successfully led the men 
of Ghent against the Count of Flanders only to be slain when his forces 
later were routed with appalling loss, is told by Froissart whose account 
Taylor follows. Philip's end, according to Froissart as quoted in Taylor's 
notes, was inglorious: ". . . it was judged that he fell into a little dyke, and 
many of them of Ghent upon him, and was so pressed to death." Philip's 
final speech in the play concludes: 

What have I done? Why such a death? -Why thus? 
Oh! for a wound as wide as famine's mouth 
To make a soldier's passage for my soul. 

[He is borne along in the route towards the bridge. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 1 19. It follows the packet copy and the text 
is arranged as two quatrains. 



30 

Adrift! A little boat adrift! 
And night is coming down! 
Will no one guide a little boat 
Unto the nearest town? 

So Sailors say -on yesterday - 
Just as the dusk was brown 
One little boat gave up it's strife 
And gurgled down and down. 

So angels say -on yesterday - 

Just as the dawn was red 

One little boat -o'erspent with gales - 

Retrimmed it's masts -redecked it's sails - 

And shot -exultant on! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i5b). 



PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 185. In line 3 no is not italicized. These 
words are altered: 

9. So] But 13] Exultant, onward sped! 



3 1 

Summer for thee, grant I may be 
When Summer days are flown! 
Thy music still, when Whippowil 
And Oriole -are done! 

For thee to bloom, I'll skip the tomb 
And row my blossoms o'er! 
Pray gather me- 
Anemone - 
Thy flower - forevermore! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i5c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 79, titled "Song." The text is arrang 
as two quatrains. One word is altered: 

6. row] sow 



32 

When Roses cease to bloom, Sir, 
And Violets are done- 
When Bumblebees in solemn flight 
Have passed beyond the Sun - 
The hand that paused to gather . 
Upon this Summer's day 
Will idle lie-in Auburn - 
Then take my flowers -pray! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham I5d). Evidently 
ED here refers to Mt. Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge. She had visited 
it in August 1846, when she made a trip to Boston, and she wrote hei 
friend Abiah Root about the deep impression the "City of the Dead" made 
on her (Letters, ed. 1931, page 17). 

[29] 



PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 78, tided 'With a Flower." The text is 
arranged as two quatrains. Two words are altered: 

i. Sir] dear 8. flowers] flower 



33 

If recollecting were forgetting, 
Then I remember not. 
And if forgetting, recollecting, 
How near I had forgot. 
And if to miss, were merry, 
And to mourn, were gay, 
How very blithe the fingers 
That gathered this, Today* 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1858, That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), in pencil and signed "Emilie.," was sent to 
Samuel Bowles. It is a variant of the copy in packet 82 (Bingham 156) in 
three lines: 

i . Oh if remembering were forgetting - 

7. How very blithe the maiden 

8. Who gathered these today! 

Lines 2 and 4 end with exclamation points; dashes, not commas, are in lines 
i, 3, and 5; line 6 is without internal punctuation. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 216; (ed. 1931), 188; also LL (1924), 
255. It follows the Bowles copy. It is also in Poems (1896), 39, titled 
'With Flowers." In Poems "this" (line 8) is rendered "these." In both 
printings line 6 is altered to read "And if to mourn were gay." 



34 

Garlands for Queens, may be - 

Laurels - for rare degree 

Of soul or sword. 

Ah but remembering me - 

Ah - but remembering thee - 

Nature in chivalry - 

Nature in charity- [no stanza "break] 

[30] 



Nature in equity - 
The Rose ordained! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 82 (Bingham i5g). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 48. 



35 

Nobody knows this little 
It might a pilgrim be 
Did I not take it from the ways 
And lift it up to theei 
Only a Bee will miss it- 
Only a Butterfly, 
Hastening from far journey - 
On it's breast to lie - 
Only a Bird will wonder - 
Only a Breeze will sigh - 
Ah Little Rose -how easy 
For such as thee to die! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, identical in text. That repro- 
duced above is in packet 82 (Bingham i5h), written about 1858. A later 
copy (Bingham 98-4 A- 10), on embossed stationery, was written about 
1860. 

Nobody knows this little Rose - 

It might a pilgrim be 

Did I not take it from the ways 

And lift it up to Thee. 

Only a Bee will miss it - 

Only a Butterfly, 

Hastening from far journey 

On it's breast to lie - 

Only a Bird -will wonder - 

Only a Breeze will sigh, 

Ah, little Rose! 

How easy - for such as thee, to die! 

PUBLICATION: Youth's Companion, LXIV (24 December 1891), 672, 
titled "A Nameless Rose"; BM (1945) 48, without title. In both printings 



it is arranged as three quatrains and follows the line arrangement of the 
packet copy. 

36 

Snow flakes. 

I counted till they danced so 
Their slippers leaped the town, 
And then I took a pencil 
To note the rebels down. 
And then they grew so jolly 
I did resign the prig, 
And ten of my once stately toes 
Are marshalled for a jig! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham id). This is one of 
three packet poems to be given a tide. 

PUBLICATION: EM (1945), 95. It is arranged as two quatrains. 



37 

Before the ice is in the pools* 
Before the skaters go, 
Or any cheek at nightfall 
Is tarnished by the snow 

Before the fields have finished, 
Before the Christmas tree, 
Wonder upon wonder 
Will arrive to me! 

What we touch the hems of 
On a summer's day- 
What is only walking 
Just a bridge away- 

That which sings so -speaks so 

When there's no one here- [no stanza break] 



Will the frock I wept in 
Answer me to wear? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham le). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 183. 



38 

By such and such an offering 
To Mr. So and So, 
The web of life woven 
So martyrs albums show! 

MANUSCRIPT: Late 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham if). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 327. 

39 

It did not surprise me - 
So I said -or thought - 
She will stir her pinions 
And the nest forgot, 

Traverse broader forests 
Build in gayer boughs, 
Breathe in Ear more modern 
God's old fashioned vows 

This was but a Birdling 
What and if it be * 
One within my bosom 
Had departed me? 

This was but a story - 
What and if indeed 
There were just such coffin 
In the heart instead? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 2a). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 111-112. 

[33] 



40 

When I count the seeds 
That are sown beneath, 
To bloom so, bye and bye - 

When I con the people 

Lain so low, 

To be received as high - 

When I believe the garden 

Mortal shall not see- 

Pick by faith it's blossom 

And avoid it's Bee, 

I can spare this summer, unremctanuy. 

MANUSCRIPT: Late 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 2b). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 52. The text is arranged as two six-line 
stanzas. 

41 

I robbed the Woods - 

The trusting Woods* 

The unsuspecting Trees 

Brought out their Burs and mosses 

My fantasy to please., 

I scanned their trinkets curious - 

I grasped -I bore away- 

What will the solemn Hemlock - 

What will the Oak tree say? 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies. The earlier, written about 
1858, is in packet 80 (Bingham 33). It is now first published. The variant 
below (Bingham 98-3-34), written about 1 86 1, is on embossed stationery, 
folded as if enclosed in an envelope. 

Who robbed the Woods - 

The trusting Woods? 

The unsuspecting Trees 

Brought out their Burs and Mosses - [no stanza break] 

[34] 



His fantasy to please - 
He scanned their trinkets - curious - 
He grasped -he bore away- 
What will the solemn Hemlock - 
What will the Fir tree -say? 

PUBLICATION: The variant is in Poems (1891), 132. 



42 

A Day! Help! Help! Another Day! 
Your prayers, oh Passer by! 
From such a common ball as this 
Might date a Victory! 
From marshallings as simple 
The flags of nations swang. 
Steady my soul: What issues 
Upon thine arrow hang! 

MANUSCRIPT: Late 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 12. 



43 

Could live did live - 

Could die did die - 

Could smile upon the whole 

T[h] rough faith in one he met not, 

To introduce fiis soul. 

Could go from scene familiar 
To an un traversed spot 
Could contemplate die journey 
With unpuzzled heart - 

Such trust had one among us, 
Among us not today - 
We who saw the launching 
Never sailed the Bay! 

[351 



MANUSCRIPT: Late 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 30). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 193. Lines i and 2 are printed as one line. 

44 

If she had been the Mistletoe 
And I had been the Rose - 
How gay upon your table 
My velvet life to close - 
Since I am of the Druid, 
And she is of the dew- 
ril deck Tradition's buttonhole 
And send the Rose to you. 

MANUSCRIPTS: 'There are two, identical in text, written late in 1858. 
That reproduced above (Bingham 3d) is in packet 80. The copy to Bowles 
(Bingham) is signed "E." and endorsed "Mr Bowles." In line i "she" is 
underlined, and line 7 is without punctuation. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 210; (ed. 1931), 199-200; also LL 
(1924), 237, among the messages to Bowles. 



45 

There's something quieter than sleep 
Within this inner room! 
It wears a sprig upon it's breast- 
And will not tell it's name. 

Some touch it, and some kiss it- 
Some chafe it's idle hand- 
It has a simple gravity 
I do not understand! 

I would not weep if I were they - 
How rude in one to sob! 
Might scare the quiet fairy / 
Back to her native wood! 

While simple-hearted neighbors 

Chat of the "Early dead"- [no stanza break] 

[36] 



We -prone to periphrasis, 
Remark that Birds have fled! 

MANUSCRIPT: Late 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 176, tided "Dejidr" with stanza 3 omitted. 
The poem is republished in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 27, with 
the missing stanza restored. 



I keep my pledge. 

I was not called - 

Death did not notice me. 

I bring my Rose. 

I plight again, 

By every sainted Bee- 

By Daisy called from hillside - 

By Bobolink from lane. 

Blossom and I- 

Her oath, and mine 

Will surely come again. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 329. The italics are not retained. 



47 

Heart! We will forget him! 
You and I tonight! 
You may forget the warmth he gave 
I will forget the light! 

When you have done, pray tell me 
That I may straight begin! 
, Haste! lest while you're lagging 
I remember him! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 

[37] 



PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 87. Two lines are altered: 

6] That I my thoughts may dim 8] I may remember him 



Once more, my now bewildered Dove 
Bestirs her puzzled wings 
Once more her mistress, on the deep 
Her troubled question flings 

Thrice to the floating casement 
The Patriarch's bird returned, 
Courage! My brave Columba! 
There may yet be Landl 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet 80 (Bingham 46). 
PUBLICATION: EM (1945), 234. The italics are not retained. 



49 

I never lost as much but twice, 
And that was in the sod. 
Twice have I stood a beggar 
Before the door of God! 

Angels twice descending 
Reimbursed my store 
Burglar! Banker Father! 
I am poor once more! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet i (H 3b). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 152. 



50 

I hav'nt told my garden yet 
Lest that should conquer me. 
I hav'nt quite the strength now 
To break it to the Bee 

[38] 



I will not name it in the street 
For shops w'd stare at me- 
That one so shy -so ignorant 
Should have the face to die. 

The hillsides must not know it 
Where I have rambled so- 
Nor tell the loving forests 
The day that I shall go 

Nor lisp it at the table - 
Nor heedless by the way 
Hint that within the Riddle 
One will walk today 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet i (H 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 189. The contraction "hav'nt" (lines 
and 3) is spelled out. Lines 6 and 7 are altered to read: 

For shops would stare, that I, 
So shy, so very ignorant, 



5' 

I often passed the village 
When going home from school - 
And wondered what they did there - 
And why it was so still 

I did not know the year then - 
In which my call would come - 
Earlier, by the Dial, 
Than the rest have gone. 

It's stiller than the sundown. 
It's cooler than the dawn 
The Daisies dare to come here- 
And birds can flutter down- 



[39l 



So when you are tired - 
Or perplexed -or cold- 
Trust die loving promise 
Underneadi the mould, 
Cry "it's I", "take Dollie" 
And I will enfold! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet i (H 3d). "Dollie" was a pet 
name for Sue, to whom a copy, now lost, presumably was sent. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 326. The text derives from a transcript 
of the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



52 

Whether my bark went down at sea - 
Whether she met with gales - 
Whether to isles enchanted 
She bent her docile sails 

By what mystic mooring 
She is held today 
This is the errand of the eye 
Out upon the Bay. 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet i (H 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 38. 



53 

Taken from men -this morning 
Carried by men today - 
Met by the Gods with banners - 
Who marshalled her away- 

One little maid -from playmates 
One little mind from school - 
There must be guests in Eden - 
All the rooms are full 



Far as the East from Even- 
Dim as the border star 
Courtiers quaint, in Kingdoms 
Our departed are. 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet i (H 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 220, titled "Requiem." 



54 

If I should die, 

And you should live 

And time sh'd gurgle on - 

And morn sh'd beam- 

And noon should burn 

As it has usual done 

If Birds should build as early 

And Bees as bustling go 

One might depart at option 

From enterprise below! 

Tis sweet to know that stocks will stand 

When we with Daisies lie 

That Commerce will continue - 

And Trades as briskly fly- 

It makes the parting tranquil 

And keeps the soul serene - 

That gentlemen so sprightly 

Conduct the pleasing scene! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet i (H 46). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 212. 



55 

By Chivalries as tiny, 

A Blossom, or a Book, 

The seeds of smiles are planted - 

Which blossom in the dark. 

[40 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1858, in packet i (H ^f). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 326. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 

56 

If I should cease to bring a Rose 
Upon a festal day, 
Twill be because beyond the Rose 
I have been called away- 

If I should cease to take the names 
My buds commemorate- 
Twill be because Death's finger 
Claps my murmuring lip! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858 (Bingham 105-4). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 333. It concludes the volume. 



57 

To venerate the simple days 
Which lead the seasons by, 
Needs but to remember 
That from you or I, 
They may take the trifle 
Termed mortality} 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1858 (Bingham 105-10). The lines are written 
on the bottom part of a torn leaf of stationery. The quality of the stationery 
and the handwriting suggest that the leaf might once have been part of 
a packet. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 19. One word is altered: 

4. I] me 
The published text has a second stanza: 

To invest existence with a stately air, 
Needs but to remember 

That the acorn there [no stanza break] 



Is the egg of forests 
For the upper air! 

It is possible that the leaf was torn after the text was transcribed for pub- 
lication, and that the missing stanza was on the top part of the verso of 
the leaf. The italics are not retained. 



58 

Delayed till she had ceased to know - 
Delayed till in it's vest of snow 
Her loving bosom lay - 
An hour behind the fleeting breath - 
Later by just an hour than Death - 
Oh lagging Yesterday! 

Could she have guessed that it w[oul]d be 
Could but a crier of the joy 
Have climbed the distant hill - 
Had not the bliss so slow a pace 
Who knows but this surrendered face 
Were undefeated still? 

Oh if there may departing be 

Any forgot by Victory 

In her imperial round - 

Show them this meek apparreled thing 

That could not stop to be a king- 

Doubtful if it be crowned! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above is in packet i (H la). A second fair copy (H 245) is ad- 
dressed "Sue." One word is variant: 

13. departing] remaining 

In form the copies are identical except that in the copy to Sue two words 
are italicized: 

7. guessed 18. Doubtful 
and "would" (line 7) is spelled out; a period concludes line 3, an exclama- 

[43] 



tion point line 9, a comma follows "Any" (line 14), and line 17 is without 
punctuation. 

PUBLICATION: This was one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, XLII 
(25 September 1890), 393, and there tided "Too Late." Two words are 
altered, the first to effect rime; the second is evidently a misprint: 

8. joy] glee 15. round] sound 

It was first collected in Poems (1890), iio-m, tided "Too Late." As in 
Higginson's article, the text derives from the packet copy. The misprint 
is corrected, but the alteration in line 8 remains. 



59 

A little East of Jordan, 
Evangelists record, 
A Gymnast and an Angel 
Did wrestle long and hard- 

Till morning touching mountain - 
And Jacob, waxing strong, 
The Angel begged permission 
To Breakfast -to return - 

Not so, said cunning Jacob! 
"I will not let thee go 
Except thou bless me" - Stranger! 
The which acceded to- 

Light swung the silver fleeces 
"Peniel" Hills beyond, 
And the bewildered Gymnast 
Found he had worsted God! 

ii. Stranger] Signor 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 53). The story of Jacob 
wrestling with the angel is told in Genesis 32. Verse 30 explains: 

[44] 



And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God 
face to face, and my life is preserved. 

In one of the very latest letters that ED wrote to Higginson, presumably 
in early spring 1886, shortly before her death, she comments on her in- 
creasing illness, concluding with a note of affectionate remembrance for 
Higginson and his family thus: 

Audacity of Bliss, said Jacob to the Angel "I will not let thee go 
except I bless thee" - Pugilist and Poet, Jacob was correct - 

The suggested change for line 1 1 is entered in pencil, in handwriting of a 
much later date. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), no. There are significant textual differ- 
ences: 

1. East of] over 10] And girt his loins anew 

2. Evangelists] As Genesis 1 1 ] "Until thou bless me, stranger!" 
3] An Angel and a Wrestler 14. beyond] among 

8. to return] and return 15. bewildered Gymnast] astonished 

9. said cunning] quoth wily Wrestler 

The nature of the variants suggests that the Single Hound version derived 
from a copy, now lost, probably sent to Sue. The packet copy, published 
in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 148, derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



60 

Like her the Saints retire, 
In their Chapeaux of fire, 
Martial as she! 

Like her the Evenings steal 
Purple and Cochineal 
After the Day! 

"Departed" -both -they say! 
i.e. gathered away, 
Not found, 

[45] 



Argues the Aster still - 
Reasons the Daffodil 
Profound! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above is in packet 2 (H ya). The copy below (H 284), in pencil, 
is addressed "Sue and signed "Emily-": 

Like her the Saints retire - 

In a Chapeau of fire- 

Martial, as she, 

Like her, the evenings steal 

Purple and Cochineal 

Unto the Day. 

"Departed both", they say- 

i e gathered away! 

Not found! 

Argues the Aster still - 

Reasons the Daffodil 

Profound! 

Three words are variant: 

2. their Chapeaux] a Chapeau 6. After] Unto 

PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 187. It reproduces the packet copy. 



61 

Papa above! 
Regard a Mouse 
Overpowered by the Cat! 
Reserve within thy kingdom 
A "Mansion" for the Rat! 

Snug in seraphic Cupboards 
To nibble all the day, 
While unsuspecting Cycles 
Wheel solemnly away! 

MANUSCRIPTS: About 1859, in packet 2 (H yb). The photostat of a 
second (penciled) copy addressed "Sue" and signed "Emilie.," written at 

[46] 



the same time, is at Harvard. The holograph has not been located. It is 
identical in form and differs in the text in one word only: 

9. solemnly] pompously 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 100. The text follows that of the copy to 
Sue. 



62 

"Sown in dishonor"! 
Ah! Indeed! 

May this "dishonor" be? 
If I were half so fine myself 
Td notice nobody! 

"Sown in corruption"! 
Not so fast! 
Apostle is askew! 
Corinthians i. 15. narrates 
A Circumstance or two! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, both written about 1859. The 
copy reproduced above is in packet 2 (H yd). The copy below (H 321), 
in pencil, is addressed "Sue-." 

"Sown in dishonor"? 
Ah! indeed! 
May this dishonor be? 
If I were half so fine, myself, 
Fd notice nobody! 

"Sown in corruption"? 
By no means! 
Apostle is askew! 
Corinthians i. 15. narrates 
A circumstance, or two! 

Line 7 is variant. The reference is to i Corinthians 15. 42-43: 

So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it 
is raised in incorruption: It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory: 
it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power. 

[47] 



The chapter commonly is interpreted as a demonstration that by Christ's 
resurrection he proved the necessity of man's resurrection. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914)* 105. The text derives from the copy to Sue. 
The italics are not reproduced. 



If pain for peSce prepares 
Lo, what "Augustan" years 
Our feet await! 

If springs from winter rise, 
Can the Anemones 
Be reckoned up? 

If night stands first -then noon 
To gird us for the sun, 
What gaze! 

When from a thousand skies 
On our developed eyes 
Noons blaze! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above (H yf) is in packet 2. The other copy (H B 136) is in 
pencil addressed "Sue-"; it is headed "Dear Sue," and signed "Emily-": 

If pain for peace prepares - 
Lo, the "Augustan" Years 
Our feet await! 

If springs, from winter rise- 
Can the Anemone's 
Be reckoned up? 

If Night stands i ni -ihen noon- 
To gird us for the sun- 
What gaze- 

When from a thousand skies 
On our developed eyes 
Noons blaze! 

[48] 



A variant is introduced in line 2: 

what] the 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 87. The text, without italics, follows the 
copy to Sue. 



Some Rainbow -coming from the Fair! 
Some Vision of the World Cashmere - 
I confidently see! 
Or else a Peacock's purple Train 
Feather by feather -on the plain 
Fritters itself away! 

The dreamy Butterflies bestir! 
Lethargic pools resume the whirr 
Of last year's sundered tune! 
From some old Fortress on the sun 
Baronial Bees -march -one by one- 
In murmuring platoon! , 

The Robins stand as thick today 
As flakes of snow stood yesterday - 
On fence -and Roof -and Twig! 
The Orchis binds her feather on 
For her old lover -Don the Sun! 
Revisiting the Bog! 

Without Commander! Countless! Still! 
The Regiments of Wood and Hill 
In bright detachment stand! 
Behold! Whose Multitudes are these? 
The children of whose turbaned seas- 
Or what Circassian Land? 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, both written about 1859. 
That reproduced above is in packet 2 (H 8a); that below (H 319) is 
addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily/' 

[49] 



Some Rainbow - coming from the Fair! 
Some Vision of the World Cashmere 
I confidently see! 
Or else a Peacock's purple train 
Feather by feather - on the plain - 
Fritters itself away! 

The dreamy Butterflies bestir! 
Lethargic pools resume the whirr 
Of last year's sundered tune - 
From some old Fortress on the sun 
Baronial Bees march - one by one - 
In murmuring platoon! 

The Robins stand as thick today 
As flakes of snow did, yesterday - 
On fence, and roof - and twig - 
The Orchis binds her feather on 
For her old lover - Don the Sun - 
Revisiting the Bog. 

Without Commander - countless - still - 
The Regiments of Wood and Hill 
In bright detachments stand! 
Behold! Whose Multitudes are these? 
The Children of whose Turbaned seas - 
Or what Circassian Land! 

Two words are variant: 

14. stood] did 21. detachment] detachments 

Below her signature she wrote: 

Dear Sue - 

I havnt "paid you an attention" for some time. 

Girl. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 76-77, titled "Summers-Armies." The 
text derives from the packet copy. One word is altered: 

20. Regiments] regiment 

65 

I cant tell you -but you feel it- 

Nor can you tell me - [no stanza break] 

[50] 



Saints, with ravished slate and pencil 
Solve our April Day! 

Sweeter than a vanished frolic 
From a vanished green! 
Swifter than the hoofs of Horsemen 
Round a Ledge of dream! 

Modest, let us walk among it 
With our faces vailed - 
As they say polite Archangels 
Do in meeting God! 

Not for me - to prate about it! 
Not for you - to say 
To some fashionable Lady 
"Charming April Day"! 

Rather -Heaven's "Peter Parley"! 
By which Children slow 
To sublimer Recitation 
Are prepared to go! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There two fair copies, both written about 1859. That 
reproduced above is in packet 2 (H 8c). The other (H 269), identical in 
text, was sent to Sue and is signed "Emily-": 

I cant tell you, but you feel it - 
Nor can you tell me - 
Saints, with ravished slate and pencil 
Solve our April Day! 

Sweeter than a vanished Frolic 

From a vanished Green! 

Swifter than the Hoofs of Hors[e]men - 

Round a Ledge of Dream! 

Modest -let us walk among it- 
With our "faces vailed" - 
As they say, polite 'Archangels' 
Do in meeting God! 



Not for me to prate about it! 
Not for you to say 
To some fashionable Lady, 
"Charming April Day"l 

Rather, Heaven's Teter Parley', 
By which children - slow - 
To sublimer Recitation 
Are prepared to go! 

"Peter Parley" was the pseudonym under which the Boston publisher 
Samuel Griswold Goodrich (1793-1860) issued some one hundred moral- 
istic tales for juvenile instruction. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 41. The text follows the copy to Sue to the 
extent of reproducing the italics in stanza 4. One word is altered: 

3. ravished] vanished 



66 

So from the mould 
Scarlet and Gold 
Many a Bulb will rise- 
Hidden away, cunningly, 
From sagacious eyes. 

So from Cocoon 
Many a Worm 
Leap so Highland gay, 
Peasants like me, 
Peasants like Thee 
Gaze perplexedly! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, identical in text, both written about 
1859. The copy in packet 83 (Bingham i6a) is reproduced above. The 
other copy (H 313), in pencil, is addressed "Sue-" and signed "Emilie." 
It has a comma at the end of line i, and a period at the end of line n, 
but is otherwise identical in form. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 57. It is without stanza division and the 
italics are not reproduced. 



67 

Success is counted sweetest 
By those who ne'er succeed. 
To comprehend a nectar 
Requires sorest need. 

Not one of all the purple Host 
Who took the Flag today 
Can tell the definition 
So clear of Victory 

As he defeated dying - 
On whose forbidden ear 
The distant strains of triumph 
Burst agonized and clear! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are three autograph copies. That in packet 83 
(Bingham i6c), reproduced above, was written in 1859. The penciled copy 
to Sue (H B 189), written at the same time, is identical in text with the 
packet copy. In form it is without stanza division, lines 7 and 8 are one, 
"flag" (line 6) is not capitalized, and a period concludes the last line. The 
copy to T. W. Higginson (BPL Higg n) was one of four poems enclosed 
in a letter (BPL Higg 54) written in July 1862. Its text is identical with 
that of the other two copies, but the form varies somewhat: 

Success -is counted sweetest 

By those who ne'er succeed - 

To Comprehend a Nectar - 

Requires sorest need- 

Not one of all the Purple Host 

Who took the Flag- today - 

Can tell the Definition -so clear -of Victory - 

As He - defeated - dying - 

On whose forbidden ear- 

The distant strains of Triumph 

Burst - agonized - and Clear! 

PUBLICATION: The story of how ED allowed Helen Hunt Jackson to in- 
clude this poem in A Masqiie of Poets (1878) is set forth in detail in the 
introduction, pages xxx-xxxiii. The volume was issued by Roberts Brothers, 

[53] 



and the editor, Thomas Niles, acknowledged to ED that he had made some 
editorial alterations. He had in fact made six. 

2. who] that 7. clear] plain 

3. a nectar] the nectar 12] Break, agonizing clear 

4. sorest] the sorest 

When the poem was collected in Poems (1890), 13, it was printed as three 
quatrains and all the alterations made by Niles were corrected except one: 

12. Burst] Break 

Since the text in Poems presumably derives either from the packet copy or 
the copy to Higginson, and since all three extant copies are identical in. 
text, one infers that "Break" is an editorial substitution. 



68 

Ambition cannot find him. 
Affection does'nt know 
How many leagues of nowhere 
Lie between them now. 

Yesterday, undistinguished! 

Eminent Today 

For our mutual honor, 

Immortality! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above is in packet 83 (Bingham i6f). The copy below, in pencil 
(H 233), was sent to Sue. It is identical in text with the packet copy: 

Ambition cannot find him! 

Affection does'nt know 

How many leagues of Nowhere 

Lie between them now! 

Yesterday, undistinguished! 

Eminent Today 

For our mutual honor, 

Immortality! 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 113. The text derives from the copy to 
Sue, but does not reproduce the italics. 

[54] 



6 9 

Low at my problem bending, 
Another problem comes - 
Larger than mine-Serener- 
Involving statelier sums. 

I check my busy pencil, 
My figures file away. 
Wherefore, my baffled fingers 
Thy perplexity? 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, both written about 1859. 
That reproduced above (Bingham iyc) is in packet 83. The variant to 
Sue (H 286) is in pencil: 

Low at my problem bending, 
Another problem comes 
Larger than mine - Serener - 
Involving statelier sums - 
I cbeck my busy pencil, 
My ciphers steal away, 
Wherefore my baffled fingers 
Thine extremity 1 ? 

In line 8 ED began to write "Thy pe," altered "Thy" to "Thine" and 
crossed out "pe." The variants are in lines 6 and 8. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 86. It reproduces the copy to Sue, but 'with- 
out italics. The final three lines are altered to read: 

My ciphers slip away, 
Wherefore, my baffled fingers, 
Time Eternity? 



70 

'Arcturus" is his other name - 
I'd rather can him "Star.'' 
It's very mean of Science 
To go and interfere! 

I slew a worm the other day - 

A "Savan" passing by [no stanza 'break] 

[55] 



Murmured "Resurgam" - "Centipede"! 
"Oh Lord -how frail are we"! 

I pull a flower from the woods - 
A monster with a glass 
Computes the stamens in a breath - 
And has her in a "class"! 

Whereas I took the Butterfly 
Aforetime in my hat- 
He sits erect in "Cabinets" - 
The Clover bells forgot. 

What once was "Heaven" 

Is "Zenith" now- 

Where I proposed to go 

When Time's brief masquerade was done 

Is mapped and charted too. 

What if the poles sh'd frisk about 
And stand upon their heads! 
I hope I'm ready for "the worst" 
Whatever prank betides! 

Perhaps the "Kingdom of Heaven's" changed - 
I hope the "Children" there 
Wont be "new fashioned" when I come - 
And laugh at me - and stare - 

I hope the Father in the skies 

Will lift his little girl - 

Old fashioned -naughty- everything - 

Over the stile of "Pearl". 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above (H 236) was sent to Sue and is signed "Emily-". The 
other copy in packet 83 (Bingham i8a) is identical in text and line spac- 
ing. There are a few differences in form. Exclamation points conclude 
lines 2, 1 6, 21, 29, 32. Other changes are: 

1 8. "Zenith"] "Zenith" 32] "Old fashioned!" naughty! every- 

22. sh'd] should thing! 

33. "Pearl"] "pearl" 

[56] 



PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 136-137, tided "Old-Fashipped," The 
second stanza is omitted. Line 3 is altered to read: 

It's so unkind of science 

The missing stanza is printed in AB (1945), 39; and the entire poem 
printed in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 1112, with line 3 cor- 
rected. 



71 

A throe upon the features - 
A hurry in the breath 
An extasy of parting 
Denominated "Death" 

An anguish at the mention 
Which when to patience grown, 
I've known permission given 
To rejoin it's own. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, both written about 1859. 
That reproduced above (Bingham i9b) is in packet 83. The copy below 
(H 239), in pencil, is identical in text; it was sent to Sue. 

A throe upon the features - 
A hurry in the breath - 
An extacy of parting 
Denominated Death. 
An anguish at the mention 
Which when to patience grown, 
IVe known permission given 
To rejoin it's own. 

It is without address or signature. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 226. The text derives from the packet 
copy. 



Glowing is her Bonnet, 
Glowing is her Cheek, 
Glowing is her Kirtle, 
Yet she cannot speak. 

[57] 



Better as the Daisy 
From the Summer hill 
Vanish unrecorded 
Save by tearful rill- 

Save by loving sunrise 
Looking for her face. 
Save by feet unnumbered 
Pausing at the place. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above is in packet 83 (Bingham i9c). A copy to Sue (H 258), 
signed "Sister-," is identical in text but shows minor differences in form: 

Glowing is her Bonnet, 
Glowing is her Cheek, 
Glowing is her Kirtle, 
Yet she cannot speak! 

Better as the Daisy 
From the "Summer hill" 
Vanish unrecorded 
Save by tearful Rill- 

Save by loving Sunrise 
Looking for her face! 
Save by feet unnumbered 
Pausing at the place! 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 66. 



73 

Who never lost, are unprepared 

A Coronet to find! 

Who never thirsted 

Flagons, and Cooling Tamarind! 

Who never climbed the weary league - 
Can such a foot explore 
The purple territories 
On Pizarro's shore? 

[58] 



How many Legions overcome - 
The Emperor will say? 
How many Colors taken 
On Revolution Day? 

How many Bullets bearest? 
Hast Thou the Royal scar? 
Angels! Write "Promoted" 
On this Soldier's brow! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above (H 93) is in packet 3. The other (H 377), signed 
"Emily-," was probably sent to Sue. Its text is slightly variant in lines i 
and 15: 

Who never lost, is unprepared 

A Coronet - to find. 

Who never thirsted, 

Flagons, and cooling Tamarind. 

Who never climbed the weary league - 

Can such a foot explore 

The purple Territories 

On Pizarro's shore? 

How many legions overcome - 

The Emperor will say? 

How many Colors taken 

On Revolution Day? 

How many Bullets bearest? 

Hast thou the Royal Scar! 

Angels! Mark "promoted" 

On this soldier's brow! 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 29, titled "Triumphant." The text de- 
rives from the packet copy. The italics are not retained. The first word of 
line 4 concludes line 3. The word order of line 14 is altered to effect a 
rhyme: 

The royal scar hast thou? 



74 

A Lady red- amid the Hill 

Her annual secret keeps! [no stanza break] 

[59] 



A Lady white, within the Field 
In placid Lily sleeps! 

The tidy Breezes, with their Brooms - 
Sweep vale -and hill -and tree! 
Prithee, My pretty Housewives! 
Who may expected be? 

The Neighbors do not yet suspect! 
The Woods exchange a smile! 
Orchard, and Buttercup, and Bird- 
In such a little while! 

And yet, how still the Landscape stands! 
How nonchalant the Hedge! 
As if the "Resurrection" 
Were nothing very strange! 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above (H 9b), in packet 3, was 
written about 1859. The copy addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily-" 
(H 227), written at the same time, has a variant fourth line: 

A Lady red, amid the Hill 
Her annual secret keeps. 
A Lady white, within the field 
In chintz and lily sleeps. 

The tidy Breezes, with their Brooms 
Sweep vale, and hill, and tree, 
Prithee, my pretty Housewives! 
Who may expected be? 

The neighbors do not yet suspect! 
The Woods exchange a smile! 
Orchard, and Buttercup, and Bird 
In such a little while! 

And yet how still the Landscape stands! 
How nonchalant the Hedge! 
As if the Resurrection 
Were nothing very strange! 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 105, tided "The Waking Year/' It de- 
rives from the packet copy. Three words are altered": 

[60] 



x. amid] upon 16. strange] odd 

14. hedge] wood 



75 

She died at play, 
Gambolled away 
~Her Tease of spotted hours, 
Then sank as gaily as a Turk 
Upon a Couch of flowers. 

Her ghost strolled sof tly o'er the hill 
Yesterday, and Today, 
Her vestments as the silver fleece - 
Her countenance as spray. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. That repro- 
duced above (H lob) is in packet 3. The other (H 310), in pencil, was 
sent to Sue, and is signed "Emily/' They are identical in text and form 
except that in the copy to Sue "Today" (line 7) is not capitalized. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 38. The text is without stanza division. In 
CP (192*4) the first five lines are at the bottom of page 269, the last four 
at the top of 270. In later collections the stanza division therefore is re- 
stored. 



Exultation is the going 

Of an inland soul to sea, 

Past the houses -past the headlands- 

Into deep Eternity 

Bred as we, among the mountains, 
Can the sailor understand 
The divine intoxication 
Of the first league out from land? 

MANUSQRIPTS: There are two copies, identical in text, both written 
about 1859. That reproduced above (H 254) is in pencil and was probably 

[61] 



sent to Sue. The copy below (H lod) is in packet 3. The right margin of 
the manuscript has been trimmed: 

Exultation is the going 
Of an inland soul to sea- 
Past the Houses, 
Past the Headlands, 
Into deep Eternity - 

Bred as we, among the mounta[ins] 

Can the sailor understand 

The divine intoxication 

Of the first league out from Lan[d] 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 116, titled "Setting Sail." The text de- 
rives from the packet copy and is arranged as t^wcrqtratrains. 



77 

I never hear the word "escape" 
Without a quicker blood, 
A sudden expectation, 
A flying attitude! 

I never hear of prisons broad 
By soldiers battered down, 
But I tug childish at my bars 
Only to fail again! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, identical in text, both written 
about 1859. That reproduced above is in packet 3 (H ice). The other 
copy (H 272), in pencil, is addressed "Sue-": 

I never hear the word "Escape" 
Without a quicker blood! 
A sudden expectation! 
A flying attitude! 

I never hear of prisons broad 
By soldiers battered down - 
But I tug, childish, at my bars 
Only to fail again! 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 31, titled "Escape." The text derives 
from the packet copy. 

[62] 



78 

A poor -torn heart -a tattered heart - 

That sat it down to rest- 

Nor noticed that the Ebbing Day 

Flowed silver to the West- 

Nor noticed Night did soft descend - 

Nor Constellation burn- 

Intent upon the vision 

Of latitudes unknown. 

The angels - happening that way 
This dusty heart espied - 
Tenderly took it up from toil 
And carried it to God- 
There - sandals for the Barefoot- 
There - gathered from the gales - 
Do the blue havens by the hand 
Lead the wandering Sails. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above (H ud) is in packet 3. The second copy, in pencil, was 
probably sent to Sue (H B 175): 

A poor - torn Heart - a tattered heart, 

That sat it down to rest- 

Nor noticed that the ebbing Day 

Flowed silver to the West; 

Nor noticed night did soft descend, 

Nor Constellation burn - 

Intent upon a vision 

Of Latitudes unknow- 

The Angels, happening that way 
This dusty heart espied - 
Tenderly took it up from toil, 
And carried it to God- 
There - Sandals for the Barefoot - 
There - gathered from the gales 
Do the blue Havens by the hand 
Lead the wandering sails. 



Onto this copy ED stitched two pictures clipped from her father's copy of 
The Old Curiosity Shop. It is variant in line 7: 

the] a 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 45; the text is derived from the packet 
copy. 



79 

Going to Heaven! 

I dont know when- 

Pray do not ask me how! 

Indeed I'm too astonished 

To think of answering you! 

Going to Heaven! 

How dim it sounds! 

And yet it will be done 

As sure as flocks go home at night 

Unto the Shepherd's arm! 

Perhaps you're going too! 

Who knows? 

If you sh'd get there first 

Save just a little place for me 

Close to the two I lost- 

The smallest "Robe" will fit me 

And just a bit of "Crown" - 

For you know we do not mind our dress 

When we are going home - 

I'm glad I dont believe it 

For it w'd stop my breath - 

And I'd like to look a little more 

At such a curious Earth! 

I am glad they did believe it 

Whom I have never found 

Since the mighty Autumn afternoon 

I left them in the ground. 

[64] 



MANUSCRIPTS: There are two copies, both written about 1859. The 
copy in packet 3 (H i2c) is reproduced above; the copy to Sue, signed 
"Emilie-" (H 259), is in pencil. It is identical in text. In form contrac- 
tions are spelled out; exclamation points are used at the end of lines 2, 15, 
27; commas for lines 3, 17, 21; a dash after line 20; and "Robe" (line 16) 
is not capitalized. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 182-183. 



80 

Our lives are Swiss - 

So still - so Cool - 

Till some odd afternoon 

The Alps neglect their Curtains 

And we look farther on! 

Italy stands the other side! 
While like a guard between - 
The solemn Alps- 
The siren Alps 
Forever intervene! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, identical in text, both written 
about 1859. That reproduced above is in packet 3 (H i2d). The copy 
below (H 305), in pencil, presumably was sent to Sue. 

Our lives are Swiss, 

So still - so cool - 

Till some odd afternoon 

The Alps neglect their curtains 

And we look further on. 

Italy stands the other side - 

While like a guard between - 

The solemn Alps- 

The siren Alps 

Forever intervene 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 55, titled "Alpine Glow." The text fol- 
lows the packet copy in stanza division and in the spelling "farther" (line 
5). The italics are not reproduced. 



8i 

We should not mind so small a flower - 

Except it quiet bring 

Our little garden that we lost 

Back to the Lawn again. 

So spicy her Carnations nod- 
So drunken, reel her Bees- 
So silver steal a hundred flutes 
From out a hundred trees - 

That whoso sees this little flower 
By aith may clear behold 
The Bobolinks around the throne 
And Dandelions gold. 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above (H 3ib) is in packet 7, 
written about 1859. Another copy (H 372), written at the same time in 
pencil, is addressed "Sue - " and signed "Emilie - ." It is identical in text 
with the packet copy; in form, lines 6 and 7 read: 

So drunken reel her Bees - 

So silver, steal a hundred Flutes 

and there is a comma after "faith" (line 10). 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 92. The text is arranged without stanza 
division. One word is altered: 

5. nod] red 



82 

Whose cheek is this? 

What rosy face 

Has lost a blush today? 

I found her-'pleiad'-in the woods 

And bore her safe away. 

Robins, in the tradition 

Did cover such with leaves, [no stanza 

[66] 



But which the cheek - 
And which the pall 
My scrutiny deceives, 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859 (H B 186). It is a penciled note, addressed 
"Sue." At the head ED has mounted a tiny picture of a bird, clipped from 
a copy of the New England Primer. The thread with which she attached 
a flower still remains. 

PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 185-186. The text is arranged as two quat- 
rains. 



83 

Heart, not so heavy as mine 

Wending late home- 

As it passed my window 

Whistled itself a tune- 

A careless snatch - a ballad - 

A ditty of the street - 

Yet to my irritated Ear 

An Anodyne so sweet - 

It was as if a Bobolink 

Sauntering this way 

Carolled, and paused, and carolled - 

Then bubbled slow away! 

It was as if a chirping brook 

Upon a dusty way - 

Set bleeding feet to minuets 

Without the knowing why! 

Tomorrow, night will come again - 

Perhaps, weary and sore - 

Ah Bugle! By my window 

I pray you pass once more. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), sent to an unidentified recipient, is signed 
"Emily/' It is a variant of the copy in packet 7 (H 



Heart not so heavy as mine 
Wending late home - 
As it passed my window 
Whistled itself a tune- 

A careless snatch - a ballad - 
A Ditty of the street - 
Yet to my irritated ear 
An anodyne so sweet - 

It was as if a Bobolink 
Sauntering this way 
Carolled, and mused, and carolled - 
Then bubbled slow away - 

It was as if a chirping brook 
Upon a toilsome way 
Set bleeding feet to minuets 
Without the knowing why - 

Tomorrow - night will come again - 
Perhaps - tired and sore - 
Oh Bugle, by the window 
I pray you stroll once more! 

The variants in the revised copy are in lines n, 14, 17-20. A third copy, 
now lost, was sent to Kate Anthon, whose transcription of it (H B 126) 
shows its text to have been identical with the revised version, except that 
it is arranged in quatrains, and in line 14 "a dusty" is rendered "the dusty." 
Kate first visited Sue in Amherst in March and again in August 1859. 
Her version is titled "Whistling under my window." The nature of the 
variants in the published text suggests that it may have derived from yet 
another version. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 71-72. The text follows that of the 
packet copy with two exceptions: 

1 8. Perhaps - tired 1 Weary, perhaps, 19! Ah, bugle, by my window 



Her breast is fit for pearls, 

But I was not a "Diver" - 

Her brow is fit for thrones 

But I have not a crest. [no stanza break] 

[68] 



Her heart is fit for home - 
I - a Sparrow - build there 
Sweet of twigs and twine 
My perennial nest. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), in pencil and signed "Emily./' was sent to 
Samuel Bowles. It is identical in form with the semifinal copy in packet 
83 (Bingham i8e), except that it adopts the suggested change "home" 
(line 5) for the originally written, "rest." The spelling of the second word 
in line 8 is "perrennial." One word is variant: 

4. have] had 

PUBLICATION: The copy to Bowles is in Letters (ed. 1894), 215; (ed. 
1931), 202-203; also LL (1924), 253. 



85 

"They have not chosen me/' he said, 
"But I have chosen them!" 

Brave - Broken hearted statement - 

Uttered in Bethleem! 

I could not have told it, 
But since Jesus dared - 
Sovreign! Know a Daisy 
Thy dishonor shared! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), in pencil, is addressed "Mrs Bowles-" and 
signed "Emily." The copy in packet 7 (H 3oc) is identical in form except 
that dashes, not commas, are used in line i, only "dared" is italicized, and 
a comma follows "Sovreign" (line 7). Line 5 reads: "I could have not told 
it," but ED wrote i over "not" and 2 over "have." That order she adopted 
in the copy to Mrs. Bowles. 

PUBLICATION: The text of the copy to Mrs. Bowles is in Letters (ed. 
1894), 2I 7; C e d- I93O, 2-04; also LL (1924), 2 55- On ty "I" is italicized. 

[6 9 ] 



86 

South Winds jostle them- 
Bumblebees come- 
Hover- hesitate - 
Drink, and are gone - 

Butterflies pause 
On their passage Cashmere - 
I - softly plucking, 
Present them here! 

MANUSCRIPTS: This is one of the poems which ED used to accompany 
a gift of flowers. The copy reproduced above is in packet 83 (Bingham 
iyb), written about 1859. A second copy (H 320) is in pencil, written 
at the same time. It is addressed "Mr. Gilbert-" and is headed "Sir-". 
Sue's brother, Thomas Dwight Gilbert of Michigan, was in Amherst on 
25 July 1859. The note evidently was sent with flowers. The text is identi- 
cal with that of the packet copy. There are two differences in form: 

3] Drink -and are gone. 7] I -softly plucking 

There is no stanza division. A third copy (Bingham 98-46-13), written 
about 1860, is arranged thus: 

South Winds jostle them- 

Bumblebees come- 

Hover - hesitate - drink - and are gone- 

Butterflies pause -on their passage Cashmere - 

I - softly plucking - 

Present them here. 

The fourth copy (BPL Higg 9) was one of three poems which ED en- 
closed in the second letter she wrote to T. W. Higginson (BPL Higg 51), 
postmarked 25 April 1862: 

South Winds jostle them- 

Bumblebees come- 

Hover - Hesitate - Drink, and are gone- 

Butterflies pause -on their passage Cashmere - 

I, softly plucking, 

Present them -Here- 



[70] 



PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 160, tided "With Flowers." The text 
derives from the packet copy. 

8 7 

A darting fear -a pomp- a tear- 
A waking on the morn 
to find that what one waked for, 
inhales the different dawn. 

MANUSCRIPT: The lines, written as prose, conclude a letter (Harvard) 
written to Mrs. Joseph Haven, about March 1859. 

PUBLICATION: Printed as prose, the lines are published in Indiana 
Quarterly for Bookmen, I (1945), 117-118. 



88 

As by the dead we love to sit, 
Become so wondrous dear- 
As for the lost we grapple 
Tho' all the rest are here - 

In broken mathematics 
We estimate our prize 
Vast in it's fading ratio 
To our penurious eyes! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, identical in text. The copy reproduced 
above, in packet i (H 2f), was written during 1859. The letter to Mrs. 
J. G. Holland in which the lines are incorporated was written on 2 March 
of the same year (H H 16): 

As by the dead we love to sit - 
Become so wondrous dear- 
As for the lost we grapple 
Though all the rest are here - 
In broken Mathematics 
We estimate our prize 
Vast, in it's fading ratio 
To our penurious eyes. 

[71] 



PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 193, from the packet copy. The copy to 
Mrs. Holland is in LH (1951), 62. 



Some things that fly there be - 
Birds - Hours - the Bumblebee - 
Of these no Elegy. 

Some things that stay there be - 
Grief - Hills - Eternity - 
Nor this behooveth me. 

There are that resting, rise. 
Can I expound the skies? 
How still the Riddle lies! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H ib). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 27, titled "The Secret." 



9 

Within my reach! 
I could have touched! 
I might have chanced that way! 
Soft sauntered thro' the village - 
Sauntered as soft away! 
So unsuspected Violets 
Within the meadows go- 
Too late for striving fingers 
That passed, an hour ago! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H ic). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 19, titled "Almost!" Two words are 
altered: 

7. meadows go] fields lie low 



9' 

So bashful when I spied her! 
So pretty -so ashamed! 
So hidden in her leaflets 
Lest anybody find- 

So breathless till I passed her- 
So helpless when I turned 
And bore her struggling, blushing, 
Her simple haunts beyond! 

For whom I robbed the Dingle 
For whom betrayed the Dell - 
Many, will doubtless ask me, 
But I shall never tell! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H id). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 91. 



92 

My friend must be a Bird - 

Because it flies! 

Mortal, my friend must be, 

Because it dies! 

Barbs has it, like a Bee! 

Ah, curious friend! 

Thou puzzlest me! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H le). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 91, titled "Who?" 



93 

Went up a year this evening! 
I recollect it well! 
Amid no bells nor bravoes 
The bystanders will tell! 

[731 



[no stanza 'break] 



Cheerful -as to the village - 
Tranquil -as to repose - 
Chastened -as to die Chapel 
This humble Tourist rose! 
Did not talk of returning! 
Alluded to no time 
When, were the gales propitious - 
We might look for him! 
Was grateful for the Roses 
In life's diverse boquet- / 
Talked softly of new species 
To pick another day; 
Beguiling thus the wonder 
The wondrous nearer drew - 
Hands bustled at the moorings - 
The crowd respectful grew- 
Ascended from our vision 
To Countenances new! 
A Difference -A Daisy - 
Is all the rest I knew! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H if). 

PUBLICATION: It first appeared in the Independent, XLIII (5 February 
1891), i, tided "Emigravit." It was collected in Poems (1891), 218-219, 
tided "Gone." The italics are not retained. 



94 

Angels, in the early morning 
May be seen the Dews among, 
Stooping - plucking - smiling - flying - 
Do die Buds to them belong? 

Angels, when the sun is hottest 
May be seen the sands among, 
Stooping - plucking - sighing - flying - 
Parched the flowers they bear along. 

[74l 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H 2a). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 90. 



95 

My nosegays are for Captives - 
Dim long expectant eyes, 
Fingers denied the plucking, 
Patient till Paradise. 

To such, if they sh'd whisper 
Of morning and the moor, 
They bear no other errand, 
And I, no other prayer. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H ab). 
PUBLICATION: Poems 0891), 17. 



Sexton! My Master's sleeping here. 
Pray lead me to his bed! 
I came to build the Bird's nest, 
And sow the Early seed- 

That when the snow creeps slowly 
From off his chamber door- 
Daisies point the way there - 
And the Troubadour. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i CH 2,c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 113. 



97 

The rainbow never tells me 
That gust and storm are by, 
Yet is she more convincing 
Than Philosophy. 

[751 



My flowers turn from Forums - 
Yet eloquent declare 
What Cato could'nt prove me 
Except the birds were here! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H 2d). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 56. Line 7 is altered to read: 

What Cato couldn't prove to me 
The italics are not reproduced. 

9 8 

One dignity delays for all - 
One mitred Afternoon - 
None can avoid this purple - 
None evade this Crown! 

Coach, it insures, and footmen - 
Chamber, and state, and throng - 
Bells, also, in the village 
As we ride grand along! 

What dignified Attendants! 
What service when we pause! 
How loyally at parting 
Their hundred hats they raise! 

How pomp surpassing ermine 
When simple You, and I, 
Present our meek escutscheon 
And claim the rank to die! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H 2e). 

PUBLICATION: This is one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393. The text is identical with that in Poems 
(1890), 109. Both derive from the packet copy, and the spelling of 
"escutscheon" is regularized. 

[76] 



99 

New feet within my garden go- 
New fingers stir the sod- 
A Troubadour upon the Elm 
Betrays the solitude. 

New children play upon the green - 
New Weary sleep below - 
And still the pensive Spring returns- 
And still the punctual snow! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet i (H 2g). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 69. 



100 



A science - so the Savans say, 

"Comparative Anatomy" - 

By which a single bone- 

Is made a secret to unfold 

Of some rare tenant of the mold, 

Else perished in the stone - 

So to the eye prospective led, 
This meekest flower of the mead 
Upon a winter's day, 
Stands representative in gold 
Of Rose and Lily, manifold, 
And countless Butterfly! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 5c). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 26. The text is arranged without stanza 
division. One word is altered: 

11. manifold] marigold 



[77] 



101 

Will there really be a "Morning '? 
Is there such a thing as "Day"? 
Could I see it from the mountains 
If I were as tall as they? 

Has it feet like Water lilies? 
Has it feathers like a Bird? 
Is it brought from famous countries 
Of which I have never heard? 

Oh some Scholar! Oh some Sailor! 
Oh some Wise Man from the skies! 
Please to tell a little Pilgrim 
Where the place called "Morning" lies! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 5d). 

PUBLICATION: It first appeared in St. Nicholas, XVIII (May 1891), 491, 
tided "Morning/* It was collected in Poems (1891), 1 13, tided "Out of the 
Morning." 

102 

Great Caesar! Condescend 
The Daisy, to receive, 
Gathered by Cato's Daughter, 
With your majestic leave! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 5e). 
PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 244. It is said to derive from a copy sent to 
Austin. 

103 

I have a King, who does not speak- 
So- wondering -thro* the hours meek 
I trudge the day away- 
Half glad when it is night, and sleep. 
If, haply, thro* a dream, to peep 
In parlors, shut by day. 

[781 



And if I do -when morning 

It is as if a hundred drums 

Did round my pillow roll, 

And shouts fill all my Childish sky, 

And Bells keep saying Victory* 

From steeples in my soul! 

And if I dont-the little Bird 
Within the Orchard, is not heard, 
And I omit to pray 
'Father, thy will be done* today j 
For my will goes the other way, 
And it were perjury! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 6a). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 49. 

104 

Where I have lost, I softer tread - 
I sow sweet flower from garden bed - 
I pause above that vanished head 
And mourn. 

Whom I have lost, I pious guard 
From accent harsh, or ruthless word- 
Feeling as if their pillow heard, 
Though stone! 

When I have lost, you'll know by this - 
A Bonnet black -A dusk surplice - 
A little tremor in my voice 
Like this! 

Why, I have lost, the people know 
Who dressed in frocks of purest snow 
Went home a century ago 
Next Bliss! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 6b). 

[79] 



PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 223-224. One word is altered: 
8. Though] Through 



To hang our head- ostensibly - 
And subsequent, to find 
That such was not the posture 
Of our immortal mind 

Affords the sly presumption 
That in so dense a fuzz - 
You -too -take Cobweb attitudes 
Upon a plane of Gauze! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 6d). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 57. 

1*6 

The Daisy follows soft the Sun - 
And when his golden walk is done- 
Sits shily at his feet 
He waking - finds the flower there - 
Wherefore -Marauder -art thou here? 
Because, Sir, love is sweet! 

We are the Flower Thou the Sun! 
Forgive us, if as days decline - 
We nearer steal to Thee! 
Enamored of the parting West- 
The peace the flight the Amethyst - 
Night's possibility! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 6e). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 146. One word is altered: 

4. there] near 

[80] 



Twas such a little -little boat 
That toddled down the bay! 
'Twas such a gallant -gallant sea 
That beckoned it away! 

Twas such a greedy, greedy wave 
That licked it from the Coast - 
Nor ever guessed the stately sails 
My little craft was lostl 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H yc). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 37, titled "Unreturning." The italics are 
not retained. 



Surgeons must be very careful 
When they take the knife! 
Underneath their fine incisions 
Stirs the Culprit -Life! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H yg). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 38. The italics are not reproduced. 



By a flower -By a letter - 
By a nimble love- 
If I weld the Rivet f aster - 
Final fast - above - 

Never mind my breathless Anvil! 
Never mind Repose! 
Never mind the sooty faces 
Tugging at the Forge! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 8b). 
PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 227-228. 

[81] 



no 

Artists wrestled here! 
Lo, a tint Cashmere! 
Lo, a Rose! 
Student of the Year! 
For the easel here 
Say Repose! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 CBingham i6b). 
PUBLICATION: BM O945), 49- 



in 

The Bee is not afraid of me. 
I know the Butterfly. 
The pretty people in the Woods 
Receive me cordially 

The Brooks laugh louder when I come 
The Breezes madder play; 
Wherefore mine eye thy silver mists, 
Wherefore, Oh Summer's Day? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, * n packet 83 CBingham i6d). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 75. One word is altered: 

7. eye] eyes 



1 12, 

Where bells no more affright the morn - 
Where scrabble never comes 
Where very nimble Gentlemen 
Are forced to keep their rooms 

Where tired Children placid sleep 
Thro' Centuries of noon 
This place is Bliss this town is Heaven 
Please, Pater, pretty soon! 

[82] 



"Oh could we climb where Moses stood, 
And view the Landscape o'er" 
Not Father's bells - nor Factories, 
Could scare us any more! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham i6e). It is not pos- 
sible to know whether this lighthearted plea for early morning quiet fol- 
lowed a series of disruptions. The poem "Sleep is supposed to be," written 
in the previous year, similarly objects to early rising. The quotation in the 
third stanza is a free rendering of the fourth stanza of Isaac Watts's hymn 
"There is a land of pure delight": 

Could we but climb where Moses stood, 
And view the landscape o'er, 
Not Jordan's stream, nor death's cold flood 
Should fright us from the shore. 

"Father's bells" would seem to imply that Edward Dickinson roused the 
family for breakfast. Factory whistles were unwelcome alarms. As a col- 
lege town, Amherst had more than a small village's customary share of 
"very nimble Gentlemen." 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 1 18, The quotation marks in lines 9 and 10 
are not retained. 



"3 

Our share of night to bear - 
Our share of morning - 
Our blank in bliss to fill 
Our blank in scorning- 

Here a star, and there a star, 
Some lose their way! 
Here a mist, and there a mist, 
Afterwards Day! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham i6g). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 14. 



n 4 

Good night, because we must, 

How intricate the dust! 

I would go, to know! 

Oh incognito! 

Saucy, Saucy Seraph 

To elude me so! 

Father! they wont tell me, 

Wont you tell them to? 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), in pencil, was sent to an unidentified recipient. 
That in packet 83 (Bingham 173) differs in form only: 

"Good night," because we must! 
How intricate the Dust! 
I would go to know - 
Oh Incognito! 

Saucy, saucy Seraph, 
To elude me so! 
Father! they wont tell me! 
Wont you tell them to? 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 210. It follows the packet copy. 



What Inn is this 
Where for the night 
Peculiar Traveller comes? 
Who is the Landlord? 
Where the maids? 
Behold, what curious rooms! 
No ruddy fires on the hearth - 
No brimming Tankards flow- 
Necromancer! Landlord! 
Who are these below? 



[84] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 221. 



116 

I had some things that I called mine 
And God, that he called his, 
Till, recently a rival Claim 
Disturbed these amities. 

The property, my garden, 
Which having sown with care, 
He claims the pretty acre, 
And sends a Bailiff there. 

The station of the parties 
Forbids publicity, 
But Justice is sublimer 
Than arms, or pedigree. 

I'll institute an " Action" - 
Til vindicate the law 
Jove! Choose your counsel - 
I retain "Shaw"! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham iye). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 52-53. A note reads thus: 

"A man who used to dig for her -a day laborer." M. L. T. 
The Amherst Directory for 1879 lists: 
"Shaw Henry, laborer h Main, E.A." 



117 

In rags mysterious as these 
The shining Courtiers go 
Vailing the purple, and the plumes 
Vailing the ermine so. 



Smiling, as they request an alms - 
At some imposing door! 
Smiling when we walk barefoot 
Upon their golden floor! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham iyf). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 279. 

118 

My friend attacks my friend! 
Oh Battle picturesque! 
Then I turn Soldier too, 
And he turns Satirist! 
How martial is this place! 
Had I a mighty gun 
I think Td shoot the human race 
And then to glory run! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham i7g). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 121-122. 



119 

Talk with prudence to a Beggar 
Of "Potosi," and the mines! 
Reverently, to the Hungry 
Of your viands, and your wines! 

Cautious, hint to any Captive 
You have passed enfranchized feet! 
Anecdotes of air in Dungeons 
Have sometimes proved deadly sweet! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham i8b). Potosi, Bo- 
livia, was long famous for the silver mines in its neighboring mountains. 
ED uses the word frequently as a symbol of fabulous riches. She always 
accents it on tlje second syllable. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 62. 

[86] 



120 



If this is "fading" 

Oh let me immediately "fade"! 

If this is "dying" 

Bury me, in such a shroud of red! 

If this is "sleep," 

On such a night 

How proud to shut the eye! 

Good Evening, gentle Fellow men! 

Peacock presumes to die! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham i8c). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 324-325. The italics are not reproduced. 



121 

As Watchers hang upon the East, 

As Beggars revel at a feast 

By savory Fancy spread - 

As brooks in deserts babble sweet 

On ear too far for the delight, 

Heaven beguiles the tired. 

As that same watcher, when the East 

Opens the lid of Amethyst 

And lets the morning go- 

That Beggar, when an honored Guest, 

Those thirsty lips to flagons pressed, 

Heaven to us, if true. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859, That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), in pencil, signed "Emilie," was sent to an uni- 
dentified recipient. The copy in packet 83 (Bingham i8d) is identical in 
text; in form dashes conclude lines i, 5, 10, 11. In line 3 "Fancy" is not 
capitalized, and in lines 4, 5, and 9, "brooks/ 1 "deserts," "ear," and "morn- 
ing" are capitalized. Line 7 is without punctuation. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 216. 



122 

A something in a summer's Day 
As slow her flambeaux burn away 
Which solemnizes me. 

A something in a summer's noon - 
A depth -an Azure -a perfume - 
Transcending extasy. 

And still within a summer's night 
A something so transporting bright 
I clap my hands to see 

Then vail my too inspecting face 
Lest such a subtle - shimmering grace 
Flutter too far for me - 

The wizard fingers never rest - 
The purple brook within the breast 
Still chafes it's narrow bed - 

Still rears the East her amber Flag - 
Guides still the Sun along the Crag 
His Caravan of Red- 

So looking on - the night - the morn 
Conclude the wonder gay - 
And I meet, coming thro' the dews 
Another summer's Day! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham 193). 

PUBLICATION: Stanzas 1-6 were published in Poems (1890), 82-83, 
titled "Psalm of the Day." Here and in subsequent editions they are printed 
as the fiFsT'six stanzas 6f an n -stanza poem the remaining five stanzas 
beginning "Like flowers that heard the tale of dews." These latter stanzas 
constitute in fact a separate poem, written about 1862 and included by 
ED in packet 85, Mrs. Todd discovered the error in 1891, and her letter 
to T. W. Higginson calling his attention to it is printed in AB, 155-156. 
A footnote on page 156 prints the missing final stanza. Line 5 has been 

[88] 



altered to read: "An azure depth, a wordless tune." The poem is corrected 
and published complete in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 10. 



Many cross the Rhine 
In this cup of mine. 
Sip old Frankfort air 
From my brown Cigar. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham I9d). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 330. 



124 

In lands I never saw - they say 
Immortal Alps look down 
Whose Bonnets touch the firmament - 
Whose Sandals touch the town- 

Meek at whose everlasting feet 
A Myriad Daisy play- 
Which, Sir, are you and which am I 
Upon an August day? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham 196). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 103. One word is altered: 

6. Daisy] daisies 



I2 5 

For each extatic instant 
We must an anguish pay 
In keen and quivering ratio 
To the extasy. 

[89] 



For each beloved hour 
Sharp pittances of years - 
Bitter contested farthings - 
And Coffers heaped with Tears! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 83 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 32, tided "Compensation." 

126 

To fight aloud, is very brave - 
But gallanter, I know 
Who charge within the bosom 
The Cavalry of Wo - 

Who win, and nations do not see- 
Who fall -and none observe - 
Whose dying eyes, no Country 
Regards with patriot love- 

We trust, in plumed procession 
For such, the Angels go- 
Rank after Rank, with even feet- 
And Uniforms of Snow. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 3 (H 9c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 30. The italics are not retained. 



127 

'Houses' -so the Wise Men tell me- 
'Mansions'! Mansions must be warm! 
Mansions cannot let the tears in, 
Mansions must exclude the storm! 

'Many Mansions', by 'his Father', 
I dont know him; snugly built! 
Could the Children find the way there - 
Some, would even trudge tonight! 

[90] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 3 (H 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 217. The italic T' (line 6) is not retained. 
The text derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 



128 

Bring me the sunset in a cup, 
Reckon the morning's flagon's up 
And say how many Dew, 
Tell me how far the morning leaps - 
Tell me what time the weaver sleeps 
Who spun the breadths of blue! 

Write me how many notes there be 
In the new Robin's extasy 
Among astonished boughs 
How many trips the Tortoise makes - 
How many cups the Bee partakes, 
The Debauchee of Dews! 

Also, who laid the Rainbow's piers, 
Also, who leads the docile spheres 
By withes of supple blue? 
Whose fingers string the stalactite- 
Who counts the wampum of the night 
To see that none is due? 

Who built this little Alban House 
And shut the windows down so close 
My spirit cannot see? 
Who'll let me out some gala day 
With implements to fly away, 
Passing Pomposity? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 3 (H loa). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 164-165, titled "Problems." 



I2 9 

Cocoon above! Cocoon below! 
Stealthy Cocoon, why hide you so 
What all the world suspect? 
An hour, and gay on every tree 
Your secret, perched in extasy 
Defies imprisonment! 

An hour in Chrysalis to pass, 
Then gay above receding grass 
A Butterfly to go! 
A moment to interrogate, 
Then wiser than a "Surrogate", 
The Universe to know! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, * n packet 3 (H IDC). 

PUBLICATION: L7P (1935), 57. The text is reproduced in facsimile fac- 
ing the tide page in the limited edition. One misprint, "hid'* for "hide" 
(line 2), was corrected in the second printing (1936). 



These are the days when Birds come back- 
A very few -a Bird or two- 
To take a backward look. 

These are the days when skies resume 
The old -old sophistries of June- 
A blue and gold mistake. 

Oh fraud that cannot cheat the Bee - 
Almost thy plausibility 
Induces my belief. 

Till ranks of seeds their witness bear - 
And softly thro* the altered air 
Hurries a timid leaf. 

[9*1 



Oh Sacrament of summer days, 
Oh Last Communion in the Haze - 
Permit a child to join. 

Thy sacred emblems to partake - 
Thy consecrated bread to take 
And thine immortal wine! 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy in packet 3 (H na) reproduced above was 
written about 1859. A second fair copy (Bingham 109-12), in pencil and 
written at the same time, has been folded as if enclosed in an envelope. 
It shows two variant readings: 

3. backward] final u. softly] swiftly 

In other respects it is identical with the packet copy except for a comma 
instead of a dash at the end of line 10, and an exclamation point at the 
end of line 13. 

Many years later, probably in 1883, ED made a third copy of the first two 
stanzas (Bingham 109-13). This copy also appears to have been folded 
as if enclosed in an envelope: 

These are the Days when Birds come back- 
A very few - a Bird or two - 
To take a parting look- 

These are the Days when Skies resume 
The old -old sophistries of June- 
A Blue and Gold Mistake - 

The fourth word in line 3 is again a variant: 

backward] parting 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 100-101, titled "Indian Summer." It 
derives from the packet copy. Three words are altered: 

4. resume] put on 18. And] Taste 
17. take] break 



Besides the Autumn poets sing 

A few prosaic days [no stanza break] 

[93] 



A little this side of the snow 
And that side of the Haze- 

A few incisive Mornings - 

A few Ascetic Eves- 

Gone-Mr Bryant's "Golden Rod"- 

And Mr Thomson's "sheaves." 

Still, is the bustle in the Brook - 
Sealed are the spicy valves - 
Mesmeric fingers softly touch 
The Eyes of many Elves - 

Perhaps a squirrel may remain - 
My sentiments to share - 
Grant me, Oh Lord, a sunny mind- 
Thy windy will to bear! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. That repro- 
duced above (H i ib) is in packet 3. The other (Bingham), in pencil and 
signed "Emilie ," was sent to an unidentified recipient. It is identical in 
text with the packet copy. In form it is arranged as two stanzas of 12 and 
4 lines. Other differences are these: *$ 

7. Rod"-] Rod" 10. Seled] Sealed, 

8. "sheaves"] "Sheaves" 15. me,] me 

9. Brook] brook 15. Lord,] Lord 

PUBLICATION: Stanzas i and 3 are in Frederick H. Hitchcock, The 
Handbook of Amherst, Massachusetts, Amherst, 1891, p. 21, where "in 
the Brook" (line 9) reads "of the brook." The entire poem, derived from 
the packet copy, is in Poems (1891), 173, titled "November." 



132 

I bring an unaccustomed wine 
To lips long parching 
Next to mine, 
And summon them to drink; 

[941 



Crackling with fever, they Essay, 
I turn my brimming eyes away, 
And come next hour to look. 

The hands still hug the tardy glass - 
The lips I w'd have cooled, alas- 
Are so superfluous Cold- 

I w'd as soon attempt to warm 
The bosoms where the frost has lain 
Ages beneath the mould - 

Some other thirsty there may be 
To whom this w'd have pointed me 
Had it remained to speak - 

And so I always bear the cup 
If, haply, mine may be the drop 
Some pilgrim thirst to slake - 

If, haply, any say to me 
"Unto the little, unto me," 
When I at last awake. 



MANUSCRIPT: About d, in packet 3 (H i2a). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 22-23. The first stanza is regularized 
into three lines. 



133 

As Children bid the Guest "Good Night" 
And then reluctant turn 
My flowers raise their pretty lips - 
Then put their nightgowns on. 

As children caper when they wake 
Merry that it is Morn - 
My flowers from a hundred cribs 
Will peep, and prance again. 

[95] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 3 (H i2b). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 89. 



Perhaps you'd like to buy a flower, 
But I could never sell - 
If you would like to borrow, 
Until the Daffodil 

Unties her yellow Bonnet 
Beneath the village door, 
Until the Bees, from Clover rows 
Their Hock, and Sherry, draw, 

Why, I will lend until just then, 
But not an hour more! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 283). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 72. The italics are not reproduced. 



135 

Water, is taught by thirst. 
Land -by the Oceans passed. 
Transport -by throe - 
Peace -by it's battles told- 
Love, by Memorial Mold- 
Birds, by the Snow. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 28b). By "Mold" (line 5) 
ED means a pictorial representation. In the first months of their corre- 
spondence, Higginson had evidently asked her for a photograph. She re- 
plied in her letter of July 1862 that she had none: 

It often alarms Father -He says Death might occur, and he has 
Molds of all the rest -but has no Mold of me. . . 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 190. 

[96] 



136 

Have you got a Brook in your little heart, 
Where bashful flowers blow, 
And blushing birds go down to drink, 
And shadows tremble so- 

And nobody knows, so still it flows, 
That any brook is there, 
And yet your little draught of life 
Is daily drunken there - 

Why, look out for the little brook in March, 
When the rivers overflow, 
And the snows come hurrying from the hills, 
And the bridges often go - 

And later, in August it may be - 
When the meadows parching lie, 
Beware, lest this little brook of life, 
Some burning noon go dry! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 28c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 52. The italics are not reproduced. One 
word is altered: 

9. Why] Then 



137 

Flowers -Well -if anybody 
Can the extasy define - 
Half a transport -half a trouble - 
With which flowers humble men: 
Anybody find the fountain 
From which floods so contra flow- 
I will give him all the Daisies 
Which upon the hillside blow. 



Too much pathos in their faces 
For a simple breast like mine- 
Butterflies from St Domingo 
Cruising round the purple line- 
Have a system of aesthetics - 
Far superior to mine. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 28d). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 47. The text derives from a transcript made 
by Mrs. Todd. 

138 

Pigmy seraphs -gone astray - 
Velvet people from Vevay- 
. Belles from some lost summer day- 
Bees exclusive Coterie - 

Paris could not lay the fold 
Belted down with Emerald - 
Venice could not show a cheek 
Of a tint so lustrous meek- 
Never such an Ambuscade 
As of briar and leaf displayed 
For my little damask maid - 

I had rather wear her grace 
Than an Earl's distinguished face- 
I had rather dwell like her 
Than be "Duke of Exeter" - 
Royalty enough for me 
To subdue the Bumblebee. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1859. The copy re- 
produced above is that in packet 7 (H 28e). The other copy (Bingham 
109-8) is signed "Emily." Its text is identical with that in the packet copy. 
There are minor differences in form: the second copy is without stanza 
division; "Earl's " (line 13) and "Bumblebee" (line 17) are underlined; 
"Duke of Exeter" (line 15) is not in quotes; "enough" (line 16) is con- 

[98] 



tracted to "eno'." Periods end lines 8 and n; an exclamation point ends 
line 6. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 124, titled "My Rose/' The text, which 
derives from the packet copy, was printed without stanza division until the 
Centennial Edition was issued (1930), where a break was introduced be- 
tween lines 13 and 14, probably because in the preceding printing (CP 
[1924], 82-83) the final four lines were printed at the top of page 83. 

139 

Soul, Wilt thou toss again? 
By just such a hazard 
Hundreds have lost indeed - 
But tens have won an all - 

Angels' breathless ballot 
Lingers to record thee- 
Imps in eager Caucus 
Raffle for my Soul! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 

PUBLICATION: This is one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393. The text is identical with that in Poems 
(1890), 15, and is likewise titled "Rouge et Noir." 



140 

An altered look about the hills - 
A Tyrian light the village fills - 
A wider sunrise in the morn- 
A deeper twilight on the lawn - 
A print of a vermillion foot- 
A purple finger on the slope - 
A flippant fly upon the pane- 
A spider at his trade again- 
An added strut in Chanticleer - 
A flower expected everywhere - 
An axe shrill singing in the woods - 

T , [no stanza break] 

[99] L J 



Fern odors on un travelled roads - 
All this and more I cannot tell - 
A furtive look you know as well - 
And Nicodemus' Mystery 
Receives it's annual reply! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 290. Nicodemus asked 
Jesus how regeneration was possible (John 3.4): 

Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is 
old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be 
born? 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 121, titled "April." One word is altered: 

3. morn] dawn 



Some, too fragile for winter winds 
The thoughtful grave encloses - 
Tenderly tucking them in from frost 
Before their feet are cold. 

Never the treasures in her nest 
The cautious grave exposes, 
Building where schoolboy dare not look, 
And sportsman is not bold. 

This covert have all the children 
Early aged, and often cold, 
Sparrows, unnoticed by the Father- 
Lambs for whom time had not a fold. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 29d). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 192. 



[100] 



I 4 2 

Whose are the little beds, I asked 
Which in the valleys lie? 
Some shook their heads, and othets smiiea- 
And no one made reply. 

Perhaps they did not hear, I said, 
I will inquire again - 
Whose are the beds - the tiny beds 
So thick upon the plain? 

'Tis Daisy, in the shortest 

A little further on - 

Nearest the door -to wake the ist- 

Little Leontodon. 

"Tis Iris, Sir, and Aster - 
Anemone, and Bell - 
Bartsia, in the blanket red - 
And chubby Daffodil. 

Meanwhile, at many cradles 
Her busy foot she plied - 
Humming the quaintest lullaby 
That ever rocked a child. 

Hush! Epigea wakens! 
The Crocus stirs her lids- 
Rhodora's cheek is crimson, 
She's dreaming of the woods! 

Then turning from them reverent - 
Their bedtime 'tis, she said- 
The Bumble bees will wake them 
When April woods are red. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 3oa). 

PUBLICATION: The poem first appeared in St. Nicholas, XVIII (June 
1891), 616, titled 'The Sleeping Flowers," Lines 18-20 are there rendered: 

[101] 



She rocked and gently smiled, 
Humming the quaintest lullaby 
That ever soothed a child. 

Three other words are altered: 

15. Bartsia] Batschia 24. woods] wood 

22. lids] hood 

When Mrs. Todd and Col. Higginson were preparing the text of Poems, 
Second Series, he had before him Mrs. Todd's transcript of the copy re- 
produced above. On 16 July 1891, he wrote her (AB, 139): 

In "The Sleeping Flowers," "Her busy foot she plied is subst. for 
"She rocked & gently smiled." Which is E. D. 's. 

She replied two days later that she had purposely altered the lines when 
she submitted copy to St. Nicholas "in order to have the rhyme perfect, in 
a child's magazine." Those lines, as well as the alterations in lines 22 and 
24 were corrected in Poems (1891), 122-123, where the poem is also tided 
"The Sleeping Flowers." One word remained altered, as in all subsequent 
editions: 

15. Batschia 

Bartsia belongs to the order of flowers including snapdragons and fox- 
gloves. In Poems (1891), and later editions, another alteration is made: 

10. further] farther 



143 

For every Bird a Nest- 

Wherefore in timid quest 

Some little Wren goes seeking round - 

Wherefore when boughs are free- 
Households in every tree- 
Pilgrim be found? 

Perhaps a home too high - 

Ah Aristocracy! 

The little Wren desires- 

[IOZ] 



Perhaps of twig so fine- 
Of twine e'en superfine, 
Her pride aspires - 

The Lark is not ashamed 
To build upon the ground 
Her modest house - 

Yet who of all the throng 
Dancing around the sun 
Does so rejoice? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 3ob). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 79. Stanza 4 is omitted, and one word is 
altered: 

4. when] where 

In later collections lines 8 and 9 are reversed. All six stanzas, with word 
and line corrections, are in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 3 2 ~33> 
derived from a transcript of the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



144 

She bore it till the simple veins 
Traced azure on her hand - 
Till pleading, round her quiet eyes 
The purple Crayons stand. 

Till Daffodils had come and gone 
I cannot tell the sum, 
And then she ceased to bear it- 
And with the Saints sat down. 

No more her patient figure 
At twilight soft to meet- 
No more her timid bonnet 
Upon the village street - 



[103] 



But Crowns instead, and Courtiers 
And in the midst so fair, 
Whose but her shy -immortal face 
Of whom we're whispering here? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 31 a). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 130. Two words are altered: 

3. eyes] eye n. her] the 



This heart that broke so long 
These feet that never flagged 
This faith that watched for star in vain, 
Give gently to the dead 

Hound cannot overtake the Hare 
That fluttered panting, here- 
Nor any schoolboy rob the nest 
Tenderness builded there. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 3ic). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 131. 



146 

On such a night, or such a night, 
Would anybody care 
If such a little figure 
Slipped quiet from it's chair 

So quiet Oh how quiet, 
That nobody might know 
But that the little figure 
Rocked softer -to and fro- 

On such a dawn, or such a dawn - 

Would anybody sigh [no stanza break] 

[104] 



That such a little figure 
Too sound asleep did lie 

For Chanticleer to wake it- 
Or stirring house below - 
Or giddy bird in orchard - 
Or early task to do? 

There was a little figure plump 
For every little knoll - 
Busy needles, and spools of thread - 
And trudging feet from school - 

Playmates, and holidays, and nuts- 
And visions vast and small 
Strange that the feet so precious charged 
Should reach so small a goal! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 7 (H 3 id). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 208-209, titled "Going/* 



M7 

Bless God, he went as soldiers, 
His musket on his breast - 
Grant God, he charge the bravest 
Of all the martial blest! 

Please God, might I behold him 
In epauletted white - 
I should not fear the foe then - 
I should not fear the fight! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859 (Bingham 105-2). It is on a torn quarter- 
sheet, but with a line drawn beneath it in the manner of verses copied into 
the packets. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 158. 



['05] 



148 

All overgrown by cunning moss, 
All interspersed with weed, 
The little cage of "Currer Bell" 
In quiet "Haworth" laid. 

This Bird -observing others 
When frosts too sharp became 
Retire to other latitudes - 
Quietly did the same- 

But differed in returning - 
Since Yorkshire hills are green - 
Yet not in all the nests I meet - 
Can Nightingale be seen - 

Or- 

Gathered from many wanderings - 
Gethsemane can tell 
Thro* what transporting anguish 
She reached the Asphodel! 

Soft fall the sounds of Eden 
Upon her puzzled ear- 
Oh what an afternoon for Heaven, 
When "Bronte" entered there! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 5b). The poem may have 
been composed on the fourth anniversary of the death of Charlotte Bronte, 
31 March 1859. Throughout her life ED was especially sensitive to such 
occasions. One may conjecture that ED intended a three-stanza poem but 
remained uncertain whether the version she preferred should consist of 
the first stanza plus the two stanzas preceding her division or the two fol- 
lowing. Read as an either-or choice, the poem has a clear unity which she 
seems by her "Or" to have intended. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 193-194, tided "Charlotte Bronte's 
Grave/' It is arranged as a five-stanza poem with "Or" omitted. One word 
is altered: 

13. many] any 

[106] 



149 

She went as quiet as the Dew 
From an Accustomed flower. 
Not like the Dew, did she return 
At the Accustomed hour! 

She dropt as softly as a star 
From out my summer's Eve- 
Less skillful than Le Verriere 
It's sorer to believe! 

2. an Accustomed] a familiar [in pencil] 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 6c). The name of Urbain 
Jean Joseph Leverrier (1811-1877), director of the Paris Observatory for 
some twenty years after 1854, became a synonym for skilled scientific 
observation because of his part in the discovery of the planet Neptune in 
1846. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 140. The suggested change is adopted. 

150 

She died -this was the way she died. 
And when her breath was done 
Took up her simple wardrobe 
And started for the sun. 
Her little figure at the gate 
The Angels must have spied, 
Since I could never find her 
Upon the mortal side. 

5-6] "Bernardine" Angels, up the hight 
Her trudging feet espied - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859, in packet 2 (H 7e). The suggested change 
for lines 5 and 6 is written on a separate slip attached by a pin to the packet 
leaf. Intended for an alternative reading, it is headed "Or." 

PUBLICATION: Youth's Companion, LXV (25 August 1891), 420, titled 
'Vanished/' and arranged without stanza division; Poems (1891), 216, 
tided 'Vanished/' The lines are arranged as two quatrains. In both the 
suggested change and the italics are rejected. 

[107] 



Mute thy Coronation - 
Meek my Vive le roi, 
Fold a tiny courtier 
In thine Ermine, Sir, 
There to rest revering 
Till the pageant by, 
I can murmur broken, 
Master, It was I- 

2. Meek] low- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1859 (Bingham 107-49). It is a penciled draft 
written on a scrap of paper. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 174. The suggested change is rejected. The 
text is arranged as two quatrains. 

152 

The Sun kept stooping stooping -low! 
The Hills to meet him rose! 
On his side, what Transaction! 
On their side, what Repose! 

Deeper and deeper grew the stain 
Upon the window pane- 
Thicker and thicker stood the feet 
Until the Tyrian 

Was crowded dense with Armies - 
So gay, so Brigadier - 
That I felt martial stirrings 
Who once the Cockade wore- 

Charged, from my chimney corner - 
But Nobody was there! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1860. The copy 
reproduced above is in packet 4 (H i3b). That below (Morgan Library) 
was sent to Sue; it is in pencil, signed "Emily." 

[108] 



The sun kept stooping - stooping - low - 
The Hills to meet him -rose - 
On his part -what Transaction! 
On their part -what Repose! 

Deeper and deeper grew the stain 
Upon the window pane- 
Thicker and thicker stood the feet 
Until the Tyrian 

Was crowded dense with Armies - 
So gay -so Brigadier - 
That I felt martial stirrings 
Who once the Cockade wore- 

Charged, from my chimney corner - 
But nobody was there! 

One word is variant: 

3. side] part 4. side] part 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 23. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. It is without stanza division and the 
italic "I" is not retained. 



'53 

Dust is the only Secret - 
Death, the only One 
You cannot find out all about 
In his "native town/' 

Nobody knew "his Father" - 
Never was a Boy- 
Had'nt any playmates, 
Or "Early history" - 

Industrious! Laconic! 
Punctual! Sedate! 
Bold as a Brigand! 
Stiller than a Fleet! 

[109] 



Builds, like a Bird, too! 
Christ robs the Nest- 
Robin after Robin 
j Smuggled to Rest! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1860. The copy re- 
produced above is in packet 4 (H i6b). The copy below (H 248) is in 
pencil, addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily-": 

Dust is the only secret - 
Death -the only one 
You cannot find out all about 
In his native town- 

Nobody knew nis Father - 
Never was a Boy- 
Had'nt any playmates 
Nor "Early history" - 

Industrious - Laconic - 
Punctual - Sedate - 
Bolder than a Brigand - 
Swifter than a Fleet - 

Builds like a Bird- too - 
Christ robs the nest- 
Robin after Robin 
Smuggled to rest- 

It is variant in three lines: 

8. Or] Nor 12. Stiller] Swifter 

ii. Bold as] Bolder than 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), in. The text is arranged as two eight-line 
stanzas. It follows the copy to Sue except that it adopts the reading "Or" 
from the packet copy. 



154 

Except to Heaven, she is nought. 
Except for Angels -lone. 
Except to some wide-wandering Bee 
A flower superfluous blown. 

[no] 



Except for winds -provincial. 
Except by Butterflies 
Unnoticed as a single dew 
That on the Acre lies. 

The smallest Housewife in the grass, 
Yet take her from the Lawn 
And somebody has lost the face 
That made Existence - Home! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1860. That repro- 
duced above is in packet 4 (H iya). That below (H 251), in pencil, is 
addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily": 

Except to Heaven -she is nought. 
Except for Angels -lone. 
Except to some wide-wandering Bee, 
A flower superfluous blown. 

Except for winds - provincial - 
Except for Butterflies 
Unnoticed as a single dew 
That on the Acre lies 

The smallest Housewife in the grass, 
Yet take her from the lawn 
And somebody has lost the face 
That made Existence - Home - 

One word is variant: 

6. by] for 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 142. The text derives from the packet 
copy. 



155 

The Murmur of a Bee 
A Witchcraft -yieldeth me- 
If any ask me why- 
Twere easier to die - 
Than tell - 

[in] 



The Red upon the Hill 
Taketh away my will - 
If anybody sneer - 
Take care -for God is here- 
That's all. 

The Breaking of the Day 
Addeth to my Degree - 
If any ask me how - 
Artist -who drew me so- 
Must tell! 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy above in packet 15 (H 8oa) was written 
about 1860. The copy below to Sue (H B 195), addressed "Sue" and 
signed "Emily." was written somewhat later, about 1861. 

The Bumble of a Bee- 
A Witchcraft, yieldeth me. 
If any ask me "Why" - 
'Twere easier to die 
Than tell! 

The Red upon the Hill 
Taketh away my will- 
If Anybody sneer, 
Take care, for God is near- 
That's All! 

The Breaking of the Day- 
Addeth to my Degree - 
If any ask me "how"- 
Artist who drew me so- 
Must tell! 

It shows two textual variants: 

i. Murmur] Bumble 9. here] near 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 71, titled "Why?" The text derives from 
the packet copy. 



You love me -you are sure- 
I shall not fear mistake - 



r -I [no stanza break] 



I shall not cheated wake- 
Some grinning morn 
To find the Sunrise left- 
And Orchards - unbereft - 
And Dollie-gone! 

I need not start -you're sure- 

That night will never be - 

When frightened -home to Thee I run- 

To find the windows dark- 

And no more Dollie-mark- 

Quite none? 

Be sure you're sure - you know - 

I'll bear it better now- 

If you'll just tell me so- 

Than when -a little dull Balm grown - 

Over this pain of mine 

You sting -again! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H Sob). "Dollie" was a pet 
name for Sue, to whom a copy now lost was probably sent. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 323. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. The italics are not retained. 



Musicians wrestle everywhere - 
All day -among the crowded air 
I hear the silver strife - 
And- waking -long before the morn- 
Such transport breaks upon the town 
I think it that "New life"! 

It is not Bird -it has no nest- 

Nor "Band" -in brass and scarlet -drest- 

Nor Tamborin - nor Man - [no stanza break] 



It is not Hymn from pulpit read- 
The "Morning Stars" the Treble led 
On Time's first Afternoon! 

Some -say -it is "the Spheres" -at play! 
Some say -that bright Majority 
Of vanished Dames -and Men! 
Some - think it service in the place 
Where we -with late - celestial face- 
Please God -shall Ascertain! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1860. The copy re- 
produced above is in packet 15 (H 823); that below (H 289), sent to 
Sue, is variant in the first line only; it is addressed "Sue" and signed 
"Emily." 

Musicians wrestling Everywhere! 
All day -among the crowded air 
I hear the silver strife - 
And waking, long before the morn 
Such Transport breaks upon the Town 
I think it that "New life"! 

It is not Bird -it has no Nest- 

Nor "Band", in Brass and Scarlet drest- 

Nor Tamborin-nor Man. 

It is not Hymn from pulpit read- 

The Morning Stars -the Treble led 

On Time's first Afternoon! 

Some say -it is the "Spheres" at play! 
Some say -that bright Majority 
Of vanished Dames -and Men- 
Some think it service in the place 
Where we -with late - celestial face- 
Please God -shall Ascertain! 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 84, titled "Melodies Unheard." The 
text derives from the packet copy. One word is altered: 

4. morn] dawn 



i 5 8 

Dying! Dying in the night! 
Wont somebody bring the light 
, So I can see which way to go 
Into the everlasting snow? 

And "Jesus"! Where is Jesus gone? 
They said that Jesus - always came - 
, Perhaps he does'nt know the House - 
This way, Jesus, Let him pass! 

Somebody run to the great gate 
And see if Dollie's coming! Wait! 
I hear her feet upon the stair! 
Death wont hurt -now Dollie's here! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 833). "Dollie" was a pet 
name for Sue, to whom presumably a copy now lost was sent. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 325. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. The italics are not reproduced. 



159 

A little Bread -a crust -a crumb - 

A little trust -a demijohn - 

Can keep the soul alive - 

Not portly, mind! but breathing - warm - 

Conscious -as old Napoleon, 

The night before the Crown! 

A modest lot -A fame petite- 

A brief Campaign of sting and sweet 

Is plenty! Is enough! 

A Sailors business is the shore! 

A Soldiers - fcaHs! Who asketh more, 

Must seek the neighboring life! 

["5] 



MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above (H 202c), in packet 37, 
was written about 1860. It is identical in text with the penciled copy 
addressed "Sue " (H 228), written at the same time. The chief difference 
in form is that the copy to Sue uses seven-line stanzas: 

A little bread, a crust -a crumb, 
A little trust, a Demijohn, 
Can keep the soul alive, 
Not portly -mind! 
But breathing - warm - 
Conscious, as old Napoleon 
The night before the Crown! 

A modest lot, a fame petite, 

A brief campaign of sting and sweet, 

Is plenty! is enough! 

A sailor's business is the Shore, 

A soldier's -Balhl 

Who asketh more 

Must seek the neighboring life! 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 66, the second stanza only, derived from 
the packet copy; no words are italicized except "petite" (line 7). The first 
stanza only is in JLL (1924), 77-78, derived from the copy to Sue. The 
entire poem is in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 43-44, derived 
from a transcript of the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



1 60 

Just lost, when I was saved! 

Just felt the world go by! 

Just girt me for the onset with Eternity, 

When breath blew back, 

And on the other side 

I heard recede the disappointed tide! 

Therefore, as One returned, I feel, 
Odd secrets of the line to tell! 
Some Sailor, skirting foreign shores - 
Some pale Reporter, from the awful doors 
Before the Seal! 

[116] 



Next time, to stay! 
Next time, the things to see 
By Ear unheard, 
Unscrutinized by Eye- 

Next time, to tarry, 
While the Ages steal - 
Slow tramp the Centuries, 
And the Cycles wheel! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 202d). A second copy now 
lost is discussed below. 

PUBLICATION: This poem was first published in the Independent, 
XLIH (12 March 1891), i, titled "Called Back." The copy used was an 
autograph originally sent by ED to Sue, who submitted it in February 
1891 to W. H. Ward the editor (see AB, 116). The final eight lines are 
not separated into quatrains, and the version differs from the text above in 
several particulars: 

2. felt] heard 9. foreign] novel 

4. blew] drew 10. Reporter] "reporter" 

8. the line] "the Line" 18] Tramp the slow centuries 

The variants quite probably were in the copy to Sue; the version is re- 
printed in AB, 145-146. 

The text of the packet copy is followed in Poems (1891), 85-86, also 
titled "Called Back." 



161 

A feather from the Whippowil 
That everlasting -sings! 
Whose galleries - are Sunrise - 
Whose Opera -the Springs - 
Whose Emerald Nest the Ages spin 
Of mellow - murmuring thread - 
Whose Beryl Egg, what School Boys hunt 
In "Recess" -Overhead! 



MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, -both written about 1860. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham) was sent to Samuel Bowles, and is signed "Emily." 
It is a variant (in lines 4 and 6) of the copy in packet 14 (H yzb), where 
it is titled by ED "Pine Bough." 

A feather from the Whippowil 
That everlasting sings - 
Whose Galleries are Sunrise - 
Whose Stanzas, are the Springs - 

Whose Emerald Nest - the Ages spin - 
With mellow - murmuring Thread - 
Whose Beryl Egg, what School-Boys hunt - 
In "Recess," Overhead! 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 2I 9J (ed. 1931), 2,05; also LL (1924), 
266: the copy to Bowles. The packet copy, lacking the title and stanza 
division, is in FP (1929), 199, with one word altered: 

4. Springs] spring 

162 

My River runs to thee - 
Blue Sea! Wilt welcome me? 
My River waits reply - 
Oh Sea look graciously - 
I'll fetch thee Brooks 
From spotted nooks - 
-Sea- Take Me! 



MANUSCRIPTS: There are three, two written about 1860. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham) is incorporated in a letter to Mrs. Bowles, written 
in August 1 86 1. The copy in packet 1 5 (H 8oc) is identical in text: 

My River runs to Thee - 
Blue Sea - Wilt welcome me r> 

My River waits reply - 
Oh Sea - look graciously! 

I'll fetch thee Brooks 
From spotted nooks - 

Say Sea - take me? 

[n8] 



A second fair copy (Bingham 98-48-1 1) is identical in text and form with 
the first two stanzas in the packet copy; the last two are variant: 

I'll bring thee Brooks - 
From dappled nooks! 

Say Sea - take me? 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 54, titled 'The Outlet" The text de- 
rives from the packet copy, but the italics are not reproduced. In the first 
three impressions the line arrangement is exactly followed. On 29 Decem- 
ber 1890, Mrs. Todd wrote Col. Higginson regarding corrections proposed 
for the fourth impression (AB, 90): "And on page 54, in the last line, I 
am sure she intended it to be two lines instead, Say, sea/ Take me!" The 
alteration was adopted and has since been retained. The poem was omitted 
from the letter to Mrs. Bowles: Letters (ed. 1894), 196-197; (ed. 1931), 
185-186; also LL (1924), 219-220. 



163 

Tho' my destiny be Fustian - 
Her's be damask fine- 
Tho* she wear a silver apron- 
I, a less divine - 

Still, my little Gipsey being 
I would far prefer, 
Still, my little sunburnt bosom 
To her Rosier, 

For, when Frosts, their punctual fingers 

On her forehead lay, 

You and I, and Dr Holland, 

Bloom Eternally! 

Roses of a steadfast summer 

In a steadfast land, 

Where no Autumn lifts her pencil - 

And no Reapers stand! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 2oia). 

PUBLICATION: This poem, which may have accompanied the gift of a 
rose, evidently was sent to Dr. and Mrs. Holland. The copy sent to them 
does not survive. It is in Letters (ed. 1894), 178-179; (ed. 1931), 172; also 
LL (1924), 261-262. It is reprinted from Letters and included in LH 
(1951), 78. There are no textual differences between the packet copy and 
the copy to the Hollands. 

164 

Mama never forgets her birds, 
Though in another tree- 
She looks down just as often 
And just as tenderly 
As when her little mortal nest 
With cunning care she wove - 
If either of her "sparrows fall", 
She "notices," above. 

No autograpn copy of this poem is known. It is here reproduced from 
the transcript made by Mrs. Todd. It is said to have been sent to the 
Norcross cousins on the death of their mother (the favorite sister of ED's 
mother), 17 April 1860. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 92. The text derives from the transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



A Wounded Deer -leaps highest - 
I've heard the Hunter tell- 
'Tis but the Extasy of death - 
And then the Brake is still! 

The Smitten Rock that gushes! 
The trampled Steel that springs! 
A Cheek is always redder 
Just where the Hectic stings! 

Mirth is the Mail of Anguish - 

In which it Cautious Arm, [no stanza break] 

[120] 



Lest anybody spy the blood 
And "you're hurt" exclaim! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H 133). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 20. The italics are not reproduced. One 
word is altered: 

suoijneo [snoptiB^) *oi 

Mrs. Todd detected the error, which was corrected in the fourth impression 
printed early in 1891 (see AB, 90). When Mrs. Bianchi printed the poem 
in CP (1924) and later collections, the word was altered to "caution/' and 
so still remains. 



1 66 

I met a King this afternoon! 
He had not on a Crown indeed, 
A little Palmleaf Hat was all, 
And he was barefoot, I'm afraid! 

But sure I am he Ermine wore 
Beneath his faded Jacket's blue- 
And sure I am, the crest he bore 
Within that Jacket's pocket too! 

For 'twas too stately for an Earl - 
A Marquis would not go so grand! 
'Twas possibly a Czar petite - 
A Pope, or something of that kind! 

If I must tell you, of a Horse 
My freckled Monarch held the rein - 
Doubtless an estimable Beast, 
But not at all disposed to run! 

And such a wagon! While I live 
Dare I presume to see 
Another such a vehicle 
As then transported me! 



Two other ragged Princes 
His royal state partook! 
Doubtless the first excursion 
These sovreigns ever took! 

I question if the Royal Coach * 
Round which the Footmen wait 
Has the significance, on high, 
Of this Barefoot Estate! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H isc). 

PUBLICATION: Youth's Companion, LXVI (18 May 1893), 2 5^> titled 
"My Little King"; BM (1945), 87. The text of both derives from a tran- 
script made by Mrs. Todd. 

167 

To learn the Transport by the Pain - 
As Blind Men learn the sun! 
To die of thirst -suspecting 
That Brooks in Meadows run! 

To stay the homesick -homesick feet 
Upon a foreign shore - 
Haunted by native lands, the while - 
And blue -beloved air! 

This is the Sovreign Anguish! 
This - the signal wo! 
These are the patient "Laureates" 
Whose voices -trained- below - 

Ascend in ceaseless Carol - 
Inaudible, indeed, 
To us -the duller scholars 
Of the Mysterious Bard! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1860. The copy in 
packet 4 (H 143) reproduced above and the penciled copy to Sue (H 363), 
signed "Emily -," are variant throughout: 

[122] 



To learn the transport thro* the pain - 
As Blind men learn the Sun- 
To die of thirst, suspecting 
That Brooks in meadows run- 

To stay the homesick - homesick feet 
Upon a foreign shore - 
Haunted by native lands -the while - 
And blue -beloved Air- 

This is the sovreign anguish - 
This -the signal wo, 
These are the patient "Laureates" - 
Whose stanza, hushed, below, 

Breaks in victorious carol, 
Inaudible - indeed - 
To tts-the duller Cornets 
Of the mysterious "Band"- 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 79. The text derives from the packet 
copy. 

168 

If the foolish, call them "flowers" - 
Need the wiser, tell? 
If the Savans "Classify" them 
It is just as well! 

Those who read the "Revelations" 
Must not criticize 
Those who read the same Edition - 
With beclouded Eyes! 

Could we stand with that Old "Moses" - 
"Canaan" denied 
Scan like him, the stately landscape 
On the other side- 

Doubtless, we should deem superfluous 

Many Sciences, 

Not pursued by learned Angels 

In scholastic skies! 



Low amid that glad Belles lettres 
Grant that we may stand, 
Stars, amid profound Galaxies - 
At that grand "Right hand"! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H 14!)). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 23-24. Two words are italicized: 

5. Revelations 17. Belles lettres 

ED's spelling "Savans" is so rendered in Poems (1896), but in CP (1924) 
and later collections it is regularized to "savants." 



169 

In Ebon Box, when years have flown 
To reverently peer, 
Wiping away the velvet dust 
Summers have sprinkled there! 

To hold a letter to the light - 
Grown Tawny now, with time- 
To con the faded syllables 
That quickened us like Wine! 

Perhaps a Flower's shrivelled cheek 
Among it's stores to find- 
Plucked far away, some morning - 
By gallant - mouldering hand! 

A curl, perhaps, from foreheads 
Our Constancy forgot 
Perhaps, an Antique trinket - 
In vanished fashions set! 

And then to lay them quiet back - 
And go about it's care - 
As if the little Ebon Box 
Were none of our affair! 

[124] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H 140). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 67. One word is altered: 

14. forgot] forget 



170 

Portraits are to daily faces 
As an Evening West, 
To a fine, pedantic sunshine - 
In a satin Vest! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1860 and both in 
packet 4. The copy reproduced above (H i4d) has been published. The 
copy below (H i7b) is an unpublished variant: 

Pictures are to daily faces 
As an Evening West 
To a fine -pedantic Sun shine 
In a satin Vest. 

The variant first line may account for the packet duplication. 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 55. 



171 

Wait till the Majesty of Death 
Invests so mean a brow! 
Almost a powdered Footman 
Might dare to touch it now! 

Wait till in Everlasting Robes 
This Democrat is dressed, 
Then prate about "Preferment" - 
And "Station", and the rest! 

Around this quiet Courtier 
Obsequious Angels wait! 
Full royal is his Retinue! 
Full purple is his state! 

[125] 



A Lord, might dare to lift the Hat 
To such a Modest Clay, 
Since that My Lord, "the Lord of Lords" 
Receives unblushingly! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H 153). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 217, titled "Precedence." 



172 

'Tis so much joy! 'Tis so much joy! 
If I should fail, what poverty! 
And yet, as poor as I, 
Have ventured all upon a throw! 
Have gained! Yes! Hesitated so- 
This side the Victory! 

Life is but Life! And Death, but Death! 
Bliss is but Bliss, and Breath but Breath! 
And if indeed I fail, 
At least, to know the worst, is sweet! 
Defeat means nothing but Defeat, 
No drearier, can befall! 

And if I gain! Oh Gun at Sea! 
Oh Bells, that in the Steeples be! 
At first, repeat it slow! 
For Heaven is a different thing, 
Conjectured, and waked sudden in - 
And might extinguish me! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H i5b). 

PUBLICATION: This is one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393, titled "Rouge Gagne." There are many 
alterations: 

12. befall] prevail 17. waked] worked 

13. Gun] sun 18. extinguish me] o'erwhelm me so 

14. Steeples] steeple 

[126] 



When it was issued in Poems (1890), 16, it bore the same tide and was 
likewise without italics in line n. The misprints were corrected, but two 
alterations, evidently intended, were retained: 

12. prevail 18. overwhelm me so 



A fuzzy fellow, without feet, 
Yet doth exceeding run! 
Of velvet, is his Countenance, 
And his Complexion, dun! 

Sometime, he dwelleth in the grass! 
Sometime, upon a bough, 
From which he doth descend in plush 
Upon the Passer-by! 

All this in summer. 

But when winds alarm the Forest Folk, 
He taketh Damask Residence - 
And struts in sewing silk! 

Then, finer than a Lady, 
Emerges in the spring! 
A Feather on each shoulder! 
You'd scarce recognize him! 

By Men, yclept Caterpillar! 
By me! But who am I, 
To tell the pretty secret 
Of the Butterfly! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H i5c). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 62, with the following alterations: 

5. Sometime] Sometimes 17. yclept Caterpillar] yclept a cater- 

6. Sometime] Sometimes pillar 
1 6. recognize] accredit 

The italics are not retained. 

[1*7] 



At last, to be identified! 

At last, the lamps upon thy side 

The rest of Life to seel 

Past Midnight! Past the Morning Star! 
Past Sunrise! 

Ah, What leagues there were 
Between our feet, and Day! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies. That reproduced above, in 
packet 4 (H i5d), was written about 1860. The copy below, in packet 34 
(H i84b), was written some two years later, about 1862. 

At last -to be identified - 

At last -the Lamps upon your side- 

The rest of life - to see - 

Past Midnight - past the Morning Star- 

Past Sunrise -Ah, What Leagues there were- 

Between our feet -and Day! 

One word is a variant: 

2. thy] your 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 141, titled "Resurgam." The text is that 
of the 1860 copy, but the line arrangement is that of the 1862 copy, with- 
out italics or stanza division. One word is altered: 

6. were] are 



175 

I have never seen Volcanoes' - 
But, when Travellers tell 
How those old phlegmatic mountains 
Usually so still - 

Bear within -appalling Ordnance, 
Fire, and smoke, and gun, 
Taking Villages for breakfast, 
And appalling Men - 

[128] 



If the stillness is Volcanic 
In the human face 
When upon a pain Titanic 
Features keep their place - 

If at length, the smouldering anguish 

Will not overcome - 

And the palpitating Vineyard 

In the dust, be thrown? 

If some loving Antiquary, 

On Resumption Morn, 

Will not cry with joy "Pompeii"! 

To the Hills return! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H i6a). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945) 252-253. The text derives from a transcript 
of the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



176 

I'm the little "Heart's Ease"! 
I dont care for pouting skies! 
If the Butterfly delay 
Can I, therefore, stay away? 

If the Coward Bumble Bee 
In his chimney corner stay, 
I, must resoluter be! 
Wholl apologize for me? 

Dear, Old fashioned, little flower! 
Eden is old fashioned, too! 
Birds are antiquated fellows! 
Heaven does not change her blue. 
Nor will I, the little Heart's Ease- 
Ever be induced to do! 

[129] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H i6c). 

PUBLICATION: Youth's Companion, LXVI (18 May 1893), 2 5^J FP 
(1929), 69. In line 13, "will I" is altered to "may you" in FP, though it is 
correctly rendered in YC, from a text supplied by Mrs. Todd. 

177 

Ah, Necromancy Sweet! 
Ah, Wizard erudite! 
Teach me the skill, 

That I instil the pain 
Surgeons assuage in vain, 
Nor Herb of all the plain 
Can heal! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H i6d). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 155. The text is without stanza division. 



I cautious, scanned my little life - 
I winnowed what would fade 
From what w'd last till Heads like mine 
Should be a-dreaming laid. 

I put the latter in a Barn 
The former, blew away. 
I went one winter morning 
And lo - my priceless Hay 

Was not upon the "Scaffold" - 
Was not upon the "Beam" - 
And from a thriving Farmer - 
A Cynic, I became. 

Whether a Thief did it- 
Whether it was the wind - 
Whether Deity's guiltless - 
My business is, to find! 

[130] 



So I begin to ransack! 
How is it Hearts, with Thee? 
Art thou within the little Barn 
Love provided Thee? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H i7c). 

PUBLICATION: Saturday Review of Literature, V (9 March 1929), 751; 
FP (1929), 19. One word is altered: 

1 8. Hearts] Heart 



I 79 

If I could bribe them by a Rose 

I'd bring them every flower that grows 

From Amherst to Cashmere! 

I would not stop for night, or storm - 

Or frost, or death, or anyone - 

My business were so dear! 

If they w'd linger for a Bird 
My Tamborin were soonest heard 
Among the April Woods! 
Unwearied, all the summer long, 
Only to break in wilder song 
When Winter shook the boughs! 

What if they hear me! 

Who shall say 

That such an importunity 

May not at last avail? 

That, weary of this Beggar's face - 

They may not finally say, Yes- 

To drive her from the Hall? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H I7d). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 114. The third stanza is regularized into six 
lines. One word is altered: 

19. her] me 



i8o 

As if some little Arctic flower 

Upon the polar hem - 

Went wandering down the Latitudes 

Until it puzzled came 

To continents of summer - 

To firmaments of sun- 

To strange, bright crowds of flowers - 

And birds, of foreign tongue! 

I say, As if this little flower 

To Eden, wandered in 

What then? Why nothing, 

Only, your inference therefrom! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 4 (H lye). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 53, titled "Transplanted." On 29 Decem- 
ber 1890, Mrs. Todd wrote Col. Higginson to suggest a few changes and 
corrections which might be made in the fourth impression of the volume, 
shortly to be printed CAB, 90): 

The third suggestion occurring to me is on page 53. Should not the 
"only", beginning the last line, be instead the final word in the pre- 
ceding line? If it read 

What then? Why nothing, only 
Your inference therefrom! 

would not the rhythm be better? 

The alteration was adopted in the fourth impression and has so since re- 
mained. 

181 

I lost a World -the other day! 
Has Anybody found? 
You'll know it by the Row of Stars 
Around it's forehead bound. 

A Rich man - might not notice it - 

Yet -to my frugal Eye, [no stanza break] 



Of more Esteem than Ducats - 
Oh find it -Sir -for me! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 14 (H 72c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 148, titled "Lost." 



182 

If I should'nt be alive 
When the Robins come, 
Give the one in Red Cravat, 
A Memorial crumb. 

If I could'nt thank you, 
Being fast asleep, 
You will know I'm trying 
With my Granite lip! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 14 (H 72d). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 149. One word is altered: 

6. fast] just 



183 

I've heard an Organ talk, sometimes - 
In a Cathedral Aisle, 
And understood no word it said- 
Yet held my breath, the while - 

And risen up -and gone away, 
A more Bernardine Girl- 
Yet - know not what was done to me 
In that old Chapel Aisle. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 14 (H 72c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 38. One word is altered: 

8. Chapel] hallowed 



[I33l 



184 

A transport one cannot contain 
May yet, a transport be 
Though God forbid it lift the lid- 
Unto it's Extasy! 

A Diagram -of Rapture! 
A sixpence at a Shbw- 
With Holy Ghosts in Cages! 
The Universe would go! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 14 (H 72f). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 84. The italics are not reproduced. One 
phrase is altered: 

7. Holy Ghosts] Seraphim 

185 

"Faith" is a fine invention 
When Gentlemen can see - 
But Microscopes are prudent 
In an Emergency. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are three, all written about 1860. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham) is incorporated in a letter to Samuel Bowles. The 
other two are both in packets. That in packet 14 (H 72g) is without italics 
in line 3. That in packet 37 (H 20 le) italicizes both words, but does not put 
"Faith" in quotes. In both packet copies line 2 reads: "For Gentlemen who 
see" the first concluding with an exclamation point, the second with a dash. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 53. The text, without italics, follows 
that of the packet copies. The version to Bowles is in Letters (ed. 1894), 
200; (ed. 1931), 191; also LL (1924), 227. 

186 

What shall I do - it whimpers so - 

This little Hound within the Heart 

All day and night with bark and start - 

And yet, it will not go - [no stanza break] 



Would you untie it, were you me - 
Would it stop whining if to Thee - 
I sent it - even now? 

It should not tease you - 

By your chair - or, on the mat - 

Or if it dare - to climb your dizzy knee - 

Or -sometimes at your side to run - 

When you were willing - 

Shall it come? 

Tell Carlo - 

He'll tell me\ 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1860. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), signed "Emily./' was sent to an unidentified re- 
cipient. It is a variant (in line 13) of the copy in packet 15 (H 783). 

What shall I do - it whimpers so - 
This little Hound within the Heart - 
All day and night - with bark and start - 
And yet - it will not go? 

Would you untie it - were you me - 
Would it stop whining, if to Thee 
I sent it - even now"? 

It should not teaze you - by your chair - 
Or on the mat - or if it dare - 
To climb your dizzy knee. 

Or sometimes - at your side to run - 

When you were willing - 

May it come - 

Tell Carlo -He'll tell me! 

ED's dog was named Carlo. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 324. The text, arranged as four stanzas of 
4, 3, 3, 3 lines, derives from the copy signed "Emily/* 



How many times these low feet staggered - 

Only the soldered mouth can tell- [no stanza break] 



Try -can you stir the awful rivet - 
Try -can you lift the hasps of steel! 

Stroke the cool forehead - hot so often - 
Lift -if you care -the listless hair- 
Handle the adamantine fingers 
Never a thimble - more - shall wear - 

Buzz the dull flies - on the chamber window - 
Brave -shines the sun through the freckled pane 
Fearless-the cobweb swings from the ceiling - 
Indolent Housewife -in Daisies -lain! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 

PUBLICATION: This was one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, XLH 
(25 September 1890), 393, titled "Requiescat" The text is identical with 
that in Poems (1890), 120, tided 'Troubled About Many Things." One 
word is altered: 

6. care] can 



188 

Make me a picture of the sun - 
So I can hang it in my room 
And make believe I'm getting warm 
When others call it "Day"! 

Draw me a Robin - on a stem - 
So I am hearing him, I'll dream, 
And when the Orchards stop their tune - 
Put my pretense - away - 

Say if it's really- warm at noon - 
Whether it's Buttercups - that "skim" 
Or Butterflies -that "bloom"? 
Then -skip -the frost -upon the lea- 
And skip the Russet -on the tree- 
Let's play those never come! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 780). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 95. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 

189 

It's such a little thing to weep- 
So short a thing to sigh - 
And yet -by Trades -the size of these 
We men and women die! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H Sod). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 20, titled "Life's Trades." The italics are 
not retained. 

190 

He was weak, and I was strong- then - 
So He let me lead him in - 
I was weak, and He was strong then - 
So I let him lead me -Home. 

'Twas'nt far the door was near 
Twas'nt dark -for He went -too - 
'Twas'nt loud, for He said nought - 
That was all I cared to know. 

Day knocked -and we must part- 
Neither-was strongest- now - 
He strove -and I strove -too - 
Wedid'ntdoit-tho'! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 8oe). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 145. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



191 

The Skies cant keep their secret! 

They tell it to the Hills- [no stanza break] 



The Hills just tell the Orchards - 
And they -the Daffodils! 

A Bird -by chance -that goes that way- 
Soft overhears the whole - 
If I should bribe the little Bird- 
Who knows but she would tell? 

I think I wont- however - 
It's finer -not to know- 
If Summer were an Axiom - 
What sorcery had Snow? 

So keep your secret -Father! 

I would not -if I could, 

Know what the Sapphire Fellows, do, 

In your new-fashioned world! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 8ia). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 131, titled "Secrets." The italics are not 
retained. One word is altered: 

6. overhears] overheard 



192 

Poor little Heart! 

Did they forget thee? 

Then dinna care! Then dinna care! 

Proud little Heart! 

Did they forsake thee? 

Be debonnaire! Be debonnaire! 

Frail little Heart! 

I would not break thee- 

Could'st credit me? Could'st credit me? 

Gay little Heart - 

Like Morning Glory! 

Wind and Sun -wilt thee array! 

[138] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 8ib). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 82. The spelling of "debonnaire" is regu- 
larized and the italics are not reproduced. Line 12 is altered: 

"Thou'll wilted be; thou'll wilted be!" 



193 

I shall know why -when Time is over- 
And I have ceased to wonder why- 
Christ will explain each separate anguish 
In the fair schoolroom of the sky- 

He will tell me what "Peter" promised - 
And I -for wonder at his woe- 
I shall forget the drop of Anguish 
That scalds me now -that scalds me now! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 8ic). 

PUBLICATION: This is one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, XLII 
(25 September 1890), 393. The text is identical with that in Poems (1890), 
151. 

194 

On this long storm the Rainbow rose - N 
On this late Morn - the Sun - 
The clouds -like listless Elephants- ; 
Horizons -straggled down- 

The Birds rose smiling, in their nests - 
The gales -indeed -were done- 
Alas, how heedless were the eyes- 
On whom the summer shone! 

The quiet nonchalance of death - 
No Daybreak -can bestir - 
The slow -Archangel's syllables 
Must awaken herl 

[i39l 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 8id). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 114. The italics are not reproduced. 



195 

For this - accepted Breath - 

Through it -compete with Death - 

The fellow cannot touch this Crown - 

By it -my title take- 

Ah, what a royal sake 

To my nescessity- stooped down! 

No Wilderness - can be 
Where this attendeth me- 
No Desert Noon - 
No fear of frost to come 
Haunt the perennial bloom - 
But Certain June! 

Get Gabriel -to tell -the royal syllable - 
Get Saints -with new -unsteady tongue - 
To say what trance below 
Most like their glory show - 
Fittest the Crown! 

MANUSCRIPTS: The text above, written about 1860, is in packet 15 
(H 82b). A variant of the second stanza (Bingham), in pencil and signed 
"Emily.," was sent to Samuel Bowles. The second line reads: 

"Where this attendeth thee-" 

The first line is without punctuation, and the last two words are itali- 
cized. 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 27. The text derives from the packet copy, 
and is arranged as three six-line stanzas. The text to Bowles is in Letters 
(ed. 1894), 216; (ed. 1931), 204; also LL (1924), 254-255. 



[140] 



196 

We dont cry -Tim and I, 
We are far too grand - 
But we bolt the door tight 
To prevent a friend - 

Then we hide our brave face 
Deep in our hand- 
Not to cry -Tim and I- 
We are far too grand - 

Nor to dream -he and me- 
Do we condescend - 
We just shut our brown eye 
To see to the end- 

Tim-see Cottages - 

But, Oh, so high! 

Then -we shake -Tim and I 

And lest I-cry- 

Tim- reads a little Hymn- 
And we both pray- 
Please, Sir, I and Tim - 
Always lost the way! 

We must die - by and by - 
Clergymen say- 
Tim- shall -if I-do- 
I-too-if he- 

How shall we arrange it- 
Tim - was - so - shy? 
Take us simultaneous -Lord - 
" -and -Me! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 82c). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 86. The text derives from a transcript made 
by Mrs. Todd. 

[140 



197 

Morning -is the place for Dew- 
Corn-is made at Noon- 
After dinner light -for flowers - 
Dukes -for Setting Sun! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 83!}). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 112. 



198 

An awful Tempest mashed the air- 
The clouds were gaunt, and few- 
A Black - as of a Spectre's Cloak 
Hid Heaven and Earth from view. 

The creatures chuckled on the Roofs - 
And whistled in the air- 
And shook their fists - 
And gnashed their teeth - 
And swung their frenzied hair. 

The morning lit - the Birds arose - 
The Monster's faded eyes 
Turned slowly to his native coast - 
And peace -was Paradise! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 830. 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 138, titled "A Tempest." The text of 
stanza two is arranged as a quatrain. 



199 

I'm "wife" -I've finished that- 
That other state - 
I'm Czar -I'm "Woman" now- 
It's safer so- 

[142] 



How odd the Girl's life looks 
Behind this soft Eclipse - 
I think that Earth feels so 
To folks in Heaven - now - 

This being comfort -then 
That other kind - was pain - 
But why compare? 
I'm 'Wife"! Stop there! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 83d). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 63, titled "Apocalypse." Two words are 
altered: 

7. feels] seems 8. folks] those 



200 

I stole them from a Bee - 
Because Thee - 
Sweet plea - 
He pardoned me! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, identical in text and form, both written 
about 1860. The copy in packet 15 (H 836) is in ink; the other cop) 
(Bingham), in pencil and signed "Emily-," was sent to Samuel Bowles 

PUBLICATION: It is among the verses to Bowles in Letters (ed. 1894) 
21 1; (ed, 1931), 200; also LL (1924), 245. 



201 

Two swimmers wrestled on the spar- 
Until the morning sun - 
When One -turned smiling to the land- 
Oh God! the Other One! 

The stray ships -passing - 

Spied a face- 

Upon the waters borne - 

With eyes in death -still begging raised - 

And hands -beseeching -thrown! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 830. 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 137. The text is arranged as two quat- 
rains. 



202 

My Eye is fuller than my vase - 

Her Cargo -is of Dew- 

And still my Heart my Eye outweighs - 

East India -for you! 

SCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 83g). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 148. "Her" is not italicized. The text de- 
rives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 



203 

He forgot -and I - remembered - 
'Twas an everyday affair- 
Long ago as Christ and Peter - 
'Warmed them" at the "Temple fire". 

"Thou wert with him" - quoth "the Damsel"? 
"No" -said Peter, 'twas'nt me- 
Jesus merely "looked" at Peter - 
Could I do aught else - to Thee? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 843). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 162. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



204 

A slash of Blue - 

A sweep of Gray - 

Some scarlet patches on the way, 

Compose an Evening Sky- 

A little purple - slipped between - 

[no stanza break] 
L 



Some Ruby Trowsers hurried on - 

A Wave of Gold - 

A Bank of Day - 

This just makes out the Morning Sky. 

MANUSCRIPTS : There are two, both written about 1860. That repro- 
duced above, written in pencil, was sent to an unidentified recipient. That 
below, identical in text, is in packet 15 (H 



A Slash of Blue! A sweep of Gray! 
Some scarlet patches - on the way - 
Compose an evening sky - 

A little Purple - slipped between - 
Some Ruby Trowsers - hurried on - 
A Wave of Gold - a Bank of Day - 
This just makes out the Morning sky! 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 46. The text follows the packet copy, but is 
without stanza division. 



205 

I should not dare to leave my friend, 
Because - because if he should die 
While I was gone and I -too late- 
Should reach the Heart that wanted me - 

If I should disappoint the eyes 
That hunted -hunted so -to see- 
And could not bear to shut until 
They "noticed" me - they noticed me - 

If I should stab the patient faith 
So sure I'd come -so sure I'd come- 
It listening- listening -went to sleep - 
Telling my tardy name - 

My Heart would wish it broke before- 
Since breaking then - since breaking then - 
Were useless as next morning's sun - 
Where midnight frosts -had lain! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 840). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 224, tided "Till the End." The italics 
are not reproduced. 

206 

The Flower must not blame the Bee - 
That seeketh his felicity 
Too often at her door- 

But teach the Footman from Vevay- 
Mistress is "not at home" -to say- 
To people -any more! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 64. The text is arranged without stanza 
division. When Mrs. Todd and Col. Higginson were selecting poems for 
inclusion in Poems, Second Series, this one was rejected. On 18 July 1891, 
Higginson wrote Mrs. Todd (AB, 141): 

I demur about "The flower must not blame the bee," for though the 
first verse is exquisite, yet the footman from Vevay is so perplexing. 
She has associated bees & Vevay elsewhere, but here a bee is not a 
foot man & it is the bee who is repelled. What do you make of it. 

207 

Tho* I get home how late - how late - 

So I get home - 'twill compensate - 

Better will be the Extasy 

That they have done expecting me- 

When Night -descending -dumb -and dark- 

They hear my unexpected knock - 

Transporting must the moment be - 

Brewed from decades of Agony! 

To think just how the fire will burn - 
Just how long-cheated eyes will turn - 
To wonder what myself will say, 
And what itself, will say to me- 
Beguiles the Centuries of way! 

[146] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 2oib). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 44, titled "The Return." 

208 

The Rose did caper on her cheek - 
Her Boddice rose and fell - 
Her pretty speech -like drunken men- 
Did stagger pitiful 

Her fingers fumbled at her work- 
Her needle would not go- 
What ailed so smart a little Maid - 
It puzzled me to know- 

Till opposite - 1 spied a cheek 
That bore another Rose - 
Just opposite - Another speech 
That like the Drunkard goes - 

A Vest that like her Boddice, danced- 
To the immortal tune - 
Till those two troubled - little Clocks 
Ticked softly into one. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 2oic). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 102, titled "The Lovers." The italics are 
not retained. One word is altered: 

13. her] the 



209 

With thee, in the Desert - 
With thee in the thirst - 
With thee in the Tamarind wood- 
Leopard breathes -at last! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 2oid). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 317. The text derives from a transcript 



made by Mrs. Todd and is placed among fragments. In the packet it stands 
as a complete poem. 



210 



The thought beneath so slight a film - 

Is more distinctly seen - 

As laces just reveal the surge - 

Or Mists -the Appenine- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 2oif). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 36. The spelling of A^ennine is regu- 
larized. 



211 

Come slowly -Eden! 
Lips unused to Thee- 
Bashful-sip thy Jessamines - 
As the fainting Bee- 

Reaching late his flower, 
Round her chamber hums- 
Counts his nectars - 
Enters -and is lost in Balms. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 202e). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 65, titled "Apotheosis." 

The first word of line 8 is arranged as the last of line 7. 



212 

Least Rivers - docile to some sea. 
My Caspian - thee. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 37 (H 202f). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 330. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. It is printed as a three-line poem. 



213 

Did the Harebell loose her girdle 
To the lover Bee 

Would the Bee the Harebell hallow 
Much as formerly? 

Did the "Paradise" -persuaded - 
Yield her moat of pearl - 
Would the Eden be an Eden, 
Or the Earl -an Ear/? 

NiAi>u=><jttin: About 1860, in pencil (Bingham 98-3-7). It is written 
on a half sheet of stationery. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 100, titled "Possession." The italics are 
not reproduced. 

214 

I taste a liquor never brewed - 
From Tankards scooped in Pearl - 
Not all the Frankfort Berries 
Yield such an Alcohol! 

Inebriate of Air - am I - 
And Debauchee of Dew - 
Reeling - thro endless summer days - 
From inns of Molten Blue- 

When "Landlords" turn the drunken Bee 
Out of the Foxglove's door - 
When Butterflies -renounce their "drams" - 
I shall but drink the more! 

Till Seraphs swing their snowy Hats- 
And Saints - to windows run - 
To see the little Tippler 
From Manzanilla come! 

3. Frankfort Berries] Vats upon the 16] Leaning against the- Sun - 

Rhine 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 14 (H 723). Evidently ED asso- 
ciated Manzanillo, an important commercial city on the southern coast of 
Cuba, with the export of rum. 

PUBLICATION: In the column of "Original Poetry" of the Springfield 
Daily Republican for 4 May 1861, the following version was anonymously 
printed: 

The May-Wine 

I taste a liquor never brewed, 

From tankards scooped in pearl; 
Not Frankfort berries yield the sense 

Such a delirious whirl. 

Inebriate of air am I, 

And debauchee of dew;- 
Reeling through endless summer days, 

From inns of molten blue. 

When landlords turn the drunken bee 

Out of the Fox-glove's door, 
When butterflies renounce their drams, 

I shall but drink the more; 

Till seraphs swing their snowy hats, 

And saint to windows run, 
To see the little tippler 

Come staggering toward the sun. 

One suspects that the alterations in lines 3 and 4 were made editorially 
to effect an exact rhyme. The change in line 16, in the direction of "sensi- 
ble" metaphor, is not in the manuscript. It is printed in Poems (1890), 
34, without tide, from the packet copy. Both suggested changes are adopted. 



215 

What is -"Paradise '- 

Who live there - 

Are they "Farmers" - 

Do they "hoe" - 

Do they know that this is "Amherst" - 

And that I -am coming- too - 

Do they wear "new shoes" -in "Eden"- 

Is it always pleasant -there- [no stanza break] 



Wont they scold us -when we're hungry - 
Or tell God -how cross we are- 

You are sure there's such a person 
As "a Father" -in the sky- 
So if I get lost -there- ever - 
Or do what the Nurse calls "die"- 
I shant walk the "Jasper" barefoot 
Ransomed folks -wont laugh at me- 
Maybe-"Eden" a'nt so lonesome 
As New England used to be! 

9. hungry] homesick 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1860, in packet 15 (H 79). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 85. The text, arranged as four quatrains, 
derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. The suggested change is 
adopted. 

216 

Safe in their Alabaster Chambers - 

Untouched by, Morning 

And untouched by Noon - 

Sleep the meek members of the Resurrection - 

Rafter of satin, 

And Roof of stone. 

Light laughs the breeze 

In her Castle above them - 

Babbles the Bee in a stolid Ear, 

Pipe the Sweet Birds in ignorant cadence - 

Ah, what sagacity perished here! 

version of 1859 

Safe in their Alabaster Chambers - 

Untouched by Morning - 

And untouched by Noon - 

Lie the meek members of the Resurrection - 

Rafter of Satin -and Roof of Stone! 



Grand go the Years -in the Crescent -above them- 
Worlds scoop their Arcs- 
And Firmamen ts- row- 
Diadems drop and Doges -surrender - 
Soundless as dots -on a Disc of Snow- 

version of 1861 

MANUSCRIPTS: It is unlikely that ED ever completed this poem in a 
version that entirely satisfied her. The earlier version she copied into 
packet 3 (H nc) sometime in 1859. The later version she copied into 
packet 37 (H 2030 in early summer, 1861. The story of how she labored 
in 1 86 1 to create a finished poem unfolds in an exchange of notes with 
Sue, who evidently had not approved the earlier version when ED had 
asked her opinion. The first note (H B 743), in pencil, reads thus: 

Safe in their Alabaster Chambers, 

Untouched by Morning - 

And untouched by Noon- 

Lie the meek members of the Resurrection - 

Rafter of Satin - and Roof of Stone - 

Grand go the Years - in the Crescent - above them - 

Worlds scoop their Arcs - 

And Firmaments - row - ' 

Diadems - drop - and Doges - surrender - 

Soundless as dots -on a Disc of Snow- 

Perhaps this verse would please you better -Sue - 

Emily - 

This new version at first must have seemed satisfactory to ED, since she 
copied it into packet 37 (identical in text and form with the above except 
that the first stanza is concluded with an exclamation point). One con- 
jectures that the transcript she made for Sue was copied down at the same 
time and dispatched to the house next door. Sue replied (in part): 
(H B 74 b): 

I am not suited dear Emily with the second verse It is remarkable 
as the chain lightening that blinds us hot nights in the Southern sky 
but it does not go with the ghostly shimmer of the first verse as well 
as the other one- It just occurs to me that the first verse is com- 
plete in itself it needs no other, and can't be coupled - Strange 



things always go alone - as there is only one Gabriel and one Sun - 
You never made a peer for that verse, and I guess youfr] kingdom 
does'nt hold one - 1 always go to the fire and get warm after think- 
ing of it, but I never can again - ... 

Sue- 

Pony Express 

Evidently ED, having received Sue's "Pony Express," again attempted a 
second stanza, for immediately following the second version, in packet 37, 
are these variant trial substitutes: 

Springs -shake the sills - 

But -the Echoes - stiffen - 

Hoar -is the window - 

And numb the door - 

Tribes -of Eclipse -in Tents -of Marble - 

Staples -of Ages -have buckled - there - 



Springs -shake the Seals - 

But the silence - stiffens - 

Frosts unhook -in the Northern Zones - 

Icicles - crawl from Polar Caverns - 

Midnight in Marble - Refutes - the Suns- 

Having pondered her choice, she selected the first of the two and dispatched 
this note to Sue (H B 740 : 

Is this frostier? 

Springs -shake tbe Sills - 

But -the Echoes- stiffen - 

Hoar -is the Window -and numb -the Door- 

Tribes of Eclipse -in Tents of Marble - 

Staples of Ages -have buckled there - 

Dear Sue - 

Your praise is good - to me - because I know 
it knows - and suppose it means - 

Could I make you and Austin - proud - 
sometime -a great way off -'twould give me 
taller feet-. . . 

Emily 

She "supposes" those from whom she seeks advice mean to help and she 

yearns to give them reason to respect her art. But here the matter ends. 

One conjectures that ED had sought advice from Sue in an attempt 



to comply with a request from Samuel Bowles to publish the poem in his 
newspaper: it is very possible that she had incorporated the original version 
in a recent letter to him. In any event, it is the original version (with 
"cadence" altered to "cadences") that appeared anonymously in the 
Springfield Daily Republican on Saturday, i March 1862: 

The Sleeping 

Safe in their alabaster chambers, 
Untouched by morning, 

And untouched by noon, 
Sleep the meek members of the Resurrection, 

Rafter of satin, and roof of stone. 

Light laughs the breeze 
In her castle above them, 

Babbles the bee in a stolid ear, 
Pipe the sweet birds in ignorant cadences: 

Ah! what sagacity perished here! 

Pelham Hill, June, 1861. 

ED had an especial fondness for the Pelham hills, and viewing them 
she may have remembered a visit to an old burying ground there. A clue to 
the puzzling dating of the lines perhaps lay in the letter to Bowles which 
presumably accompanied the copy she sent him. 

When ED initiated her correspondence with T. W. Higginson on 
15 April, six weeks after "The Sleeping" had appeared in the SDR, she 
enclosed four poems for his critical assessment. Among them was a copy 
of the second version of this poem (BPL Higg 4), given a new line 
arrangement: 

Safe in their Alabaster Chambers - 

Untouched by Morning - 

And untouched by Noon- 

Sleep the meek members of the Resurrection, 

Rafter of Satin -and Roof of Stone - 

Grand go the Years, 

In the Crescent above them- 

Worlds scoop their Arcs- 

And Firmaments - row - 

Diadems - drop - 

And Doges - surrender - 

Soundless as Dots, 

On a Disc of Snow. 



Higginson's reply does not survive, but from her next letter to him there 
is no reason to suppose that he singled the poem out for special comment. 
What ED's final thoughts about these versions may have been are not 
known. She seems never to have referred to the poem again, and there is 
no later copy in any version or arrangement. 

PUBLICATION: The SDR publication is discussed above. The packet 
copy version of 1859 was one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393. The text is arranged as two quatrains but 
is not otherwise altered. Higginson comments on it: 

This is the form in which she finally left these lines, but as she sent 
them to me, years ago, the following took the place of the second 
verse, and it seems to me that, with all its too daring condensation, 
it strikes a note too fine to be lost. 

He then quotes the second stanza from the copy that ED had sent to him. 
The text issued in Poems (1890), 113, without title, is a reconstruction of 
the two versions arranged as three stanzas, and in this form has persisted 
in all editions. The version of 1859 furnished the text for stanzas i and 2; 
the second stanza of the version of 1861 becomes stanza 3, and the lines 
are arranged as three quatrains. One phrase is altered: 

castle above them] castle of sunshine 

Portions of the correspondence with Sue and of the unused stanza ("Springs 
shake. . .") are in LL (1924), 78, and FF (1932), 164. A facsimile of 
the copy sent to Higginson is reproduced in T. W. Higginson and H. W. 
Boynton, A Readers History of American Literature, Boston, 1903, pages 

130-131- 



217 

Savior! I've no one else to tell - 

And so I trouble thee. 

I am the one forgot thee so - 

Dost thou remember me? 

Nor, for myself, I came so far- 

That were the little load - 

I brought thee the imperial Heart 

I had not strength to hold- [no stanza break] 



The Heart I carried in my own - 
Till mine too heavy grew- 
Yet- strangest heavier since it went- 
Is it too large for you} 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written in 1861. The copy repro- 
duced above (H 309) is a variant of the copy in packet 20 (H noa), 
given below; it was sent to Sue and seems to have been written with the 
same pen and ink. ED has added four new lines at the beginning and has 
adapted line 5 to the change. The first of the suggested alternate readings 
from the packet copy is adopted in the copy to Sue; the second is rejected. 
Sue has noted in pencil in the upper right margin of her copy: 

S.H.D'scopy- 

5- 
The packet copy reads thus: 

Father -I bring thee-not Myself - 
That were the little load - 
I bring thee the departed Heart 
I had not strength to hold- 

The Heart I cherished in my own 
Till mine too heavy grew 
Yet - strangest - heavier - since it went- 
Is it too large for you? 

3. departed] imperial 4. strength] power 

PUBLICATION: The copy to Sue is in London Mercury, XIX (February 
1929), 358; and FP (1929), 188. Only "heavier" is italicized. The text is 
arranged as three stanzas of 4, 4, 5 lines. Three words are altered: 

5. Nor] Not 12. you] Thee 

10. grew] be 

The packet copy is in Poems (1896), 88, where the suggested change for 
line 3 is adopted. 

218 

Is it true, dear Sue? 

Are there two? 

I should'nt like to come [no stanza break] 

[156] 



For fear of joggling Him! 
If I could shut him up 
In a Coffee Cup, 
Or tie him to a pin 
Till I got in - 
Or make him fast 
To "Toby's" fist- 
Hist! Whist! I'd come! 

MANUSCRIPT: The eldest of the children of Austin and Susan Dickin- 
son was Edward, born 19 June 1861. This letter-poem, signed "Emily-" 
(H B 140), was evidently dispatched to Sue the moment the news of his 
birth crossed to the homestead. Sue's note at the bottom of the poem reads: 

1 860 - written on Ned's birth-day - 
Toby was the cat- 

PUBLICATION: LL (1924), 53. One word was altered: 
10. "Toby's"] Pussy's 

219 

She sweeps with many-colored Brooms - 
And leaves the Shreds behind 
Oh Housewife in the Evening West- 
Come back, and dust the Pond! 

You dropped a Purple Ravelling in 
You dropped an Amber thread - 
And now you've littered all the East 
With Duds of Emerald! 

And still, she plies her spotted Brooms, 
And still the Aprons fly, 
Till Brooms fade softly into stars - 
And then I come away- 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two. The copy reproduced above, in packet 
23 (H 74b), was written about 1861; the variant below (H 312), presum- 
ably sent Sue and signed "Emily.," was written about 1862: 

[I57l 



She sweeps with many-colored Brooms - 
And leaves the Shreds behind - 
Oh Housewife in the Evening West- 
Come hack -and dust the Pond- 

You dropped a Purple Ravelling in- 
You dropped an Amber Thread - 
And now you've littered all the East 
With Duds of Emerald - 

And still She plies Her spotted thrift 
And still the scene prevails 
Till Dusk obstructs the Diligence - 
Or Contemplation fails. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 162. The text follows that of the packet 
copy. The variant third stanza has not been published. 



220 

Could I -then -shut the door- 
Lest my beseeching face -at last- 
Rejected - be - of Her? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861 (H B 125), in pencil. It is addressed "Sue." 
PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 255. The text is arranged as prose. 



221 

It cant be "Summer '! 

That -got through! 

It's early -yet -for "Spring"! 

There's that long town of White - to cross - 

Before the Blackbirds sing! 

It cant be "Dying"! 

It's too Rouge - 

The Dead shall go in White - 

So Sunset shuts my question down 

With Cuffs of Chrysolite! 

[158] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H s6d). Kate Scott Anthon, 
who visited Sue in late October 1861, made a transcript of a copy that ED 
sent her (H B 126). Identical in text it reads thus: 

Emily sent over this poem, with 

three clover heads & some bright autumn leaves 



It can't be "summer" 

That got through - 
Its early yet for "Spring" 
Then there's that town of white to cross 

Before the Blackbirds sing. 
It can't be "dying" 
Its too rouge 

The Dead shall go in white 
So Sunset shuts my question down 
With cuffs of Chrysolite 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 169. The text follows the packet copy, 
though arranged as two quatrains. One word is altered: 

10. Cuffs] clasps 



222 

When Katie walks, this simple pair accompany her side, 

When Katie runs unwearied they follow on the road, 

When Katie kneels, their loving hands still clasp her pious knee 

Ah! Katie! Smile at Fortune, with two so knit to thee\ 

No autograph copy of these lines is known. They are here reproduced 
from a transcript made by Kate Scott Anthon (H B 126), with the nota- 
tion: 

Emily knitted a pair of garters for me 

& sent them over with these lines 

Kate Scott, whose first husband, C. L. Turner, died in 1857, visited Sue 
on some four or five occasions during the years 1859-1861; she married 
John Anthon in 1866. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1931 only), 146. Two words differ from 
those in the transcript: 

2. follow] travel 3. hands] bands 

[159] 



Only "knit" is italicized. It is signed "Emilie." Mrs. Todd remarks that her 
text derives from a transcript sent to her by Mrs. Anthon. 

223 

I Came to buy a smile- today - 

But just a single smile - 

The smallest one upon your face 

Will suit me just as well - 

The one that no one else would miss 

It shone so very small - 

I'm pleading at the "counter"-sir- 

Could you afford to sell- 

IVe Diamonds -on my fingers - 
You know what Diamonds are? 
IVe Rubies -like the Evening Blood - 
And Topaz -like the star! 
'Twould be "a Bargain" for a Jewl 
Say -may I have it -Sir? 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1861. The copy 
reproduced above (Bowles), signed "Emily-," was sent to Samuel Bowles. 
It is identical in text with the copy in packet 8 (H 34) below, and has 
adopted the suggested change for line 3. 

I came to buy a smile- today - 

But just a single smile - 

The smallest one upon your cheek - 

Will suit me just as well- 

The one that no one else would miss 

It shone so very small - 

I'm pleading at the counter - Sir - 

Could you afford to sell? 

I've Diamonds -on my fingers! 
You know what Diamonds - are! 
I've Rubies -like the Evening Blood - 
And Topaz -like the Star! 
'Twould be a bargain for a Jew! 
Say? May I have it - Sir? 

3. cheek] face 
[160] 



PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 140. The text derives from the packet copy, 
and the suggested change is rejected. The two final lines are arranged as 
a separate stanza. 

224 

I've nothing else - to bring, You know - 
So I keep bringing These - 
Just as the Night keeps fetching Stars 
To our familiar eyes- 

Maybe, we should'nt mind them- 
Unless they did'nt come - 
Then - maybe, it would puzzle us 
To find our way Home- 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, identical in text, both written about 
1 86 1. The copy reproduced above (H 204d) is in packet 37. That below 
(Bowles), signed "Emily-," was sent to Samuel Bowles and probably 
accompanied a gift of flowers. 

I've nothing else, to bring, you know- 
So I keep bringing these - 
Just as die Night keeps fetching stars - 
To our familiar Eyes- 
Mayke-we should'nt mind them- 
Unless they did'nt conte- 
Then- maybe it would puzzle us 
To find our way Home! 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 68. Though derived from the packet copy, 
the text is arranged without stanza division. 

225 

Jesus! thy Crucifix 
Enable thee to guess 
The smaller size! 

Jesus! thy second face 
Mind thee in Paradise 
Of our's! 

[161] 



MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above, in packet 20 (H noe), 
was written in 1861. Another copy (Hooker), identical in text, concludes 
a letter written to Samuel Bowles in the same year: 

Jesus! thy Crucifix 
Enable thee to guess 
The smaller size- 

Jesus! thy second face 
Mind thee -in Paradise - 
Of Our's. 

The letter is unpublished. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 124. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. One word is altered : 

2. Enable] Enables 

226 

[Shjould you but fail [at] -Sea- 

[In] sight of me- 

[Or] doomed lie- 

[Ne]xt Sun -to die- 

[O]r rap -at Paradise -unheard 

Td harass God 

Until he let [you] in! 

This poem is incorporated in a letter written to Samuel Bowles in 
1 86 1 (Hooker). Neither the poem nor the letter is published. The edges of 
the manuscript have been torn away, and the text has been conjecturally 
supplied. The letter is a note of thanks for some unidentified thought or 
act. The poem, which concludes it, is introduced by the remark: 

To "thank you" - [slhames my thought! 
It is signed "Emily." 

227 

Teach Him - when He makes the names - 
> Such an one - to say - 

On his babbling - Berry - lips - [no stanza break ] 



As should sound - to me - 
Were my Ear - as near his nest - 
As my thought - today - 
As should sound - 
"Forbid us not"- 
Some like "Emily." 

MANUSCRIPT: Written in late December 1861, this poem (Bingham) 
was sent to Mrs. Samuel Bowles shortly after the birth on 19 December of 
their son, Charles Allen Bowles. It is headed by the title "Baby - ." 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 196; (ed. 1931), 190; also LL 
(1924), 219. 



228 

Blazing in Gold and quenching in Purple 
Leaping like Leopards to the Sky 
Then at the feet of the old Horizon 
Laying her spotted Face to die 
Stooping as low as the Otter's Window 
Touching the Roof and tinting the Barn 
Kissing her Bonnet to the Meadow 
And the Juggler of Day is gone 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two copies of this poem. A third, now lost, 
is known to have been made. That reproduced above (BPL Higg 21) was 
one of four enclosed in a letter (BPL Higg 60) to T. W. Higginson, post- 
marked 9 June 1866. The other copy, written some five years earlier, 
about 1 86 1, is in packet 23 (H 1273): 

Blazing in Gold -and 

Quenching -in Purple! 

Leaping -like Leopards -in the sky- 

Then-at the feet of the old Horizon - 

Laying it's spotted face -to die! 

Stooping as low as the kitchen window - 

Touching the Roof- 

And tinting the Barn- 

Kissing it's Bonnet to the Meadow - 

And the Juggler of Day - is gone! 



In line 3 ED later crossed out "in" and substituted "to." There are three 
variants in the copy to Higginson: 

4. her] it's 7. her] it's, 

5. Otter's] kitchen 

The third (lost) copy evidently was sent to Sue. A footnote in AB, 140, 
reproduces a letter written to Mrs. Todd by ED's cousin, Perez D. Cowan, 
dated 9 June 1891, wherein he transcribes the poem from memory as one 
that had been given him by Susan Dickinson when he was an Amherst 
undergraduate (1862-1866). It is rendered thus: 

Blazing in gold, and quenching in purple, 
Leaping like leopards in the sky, 
At the feet of the old horizon 
Laying her spotted face to die, 

Bending low at the oriel window 
Flooding the steeple, and tinting the ham, 
Kissing her bonnet to the meadow 
And the Juggler of Day is gone. 

"Then" is omitted from line 3. Other variants are these: 

2. to] in 6. Touching the Roof] Flooding the 

5. Stooping as low as] Bending low at steeple 

5. Otter's] oriel 

A faulty memory might account for some of the differences, but the nature 
of the changes in lines 5 and 6 suggests that his copy was a variant. The 
conjecture is somewhat substantiated by the version of the poem which 
was anonymously published in the Springfield Daily Republican on 30 
March 1864 in the "Wit and Wisdom" column, titled "Sunset:" 

Blazing in gold, and quenching in purple, 

Leaping like leopards in the sky, 
Then at the feet of the old horizon 

Laying her spotted face to die; 
Stooping as low as the oriel window, 

Touching the roof, and tinting the barn, 
Kissing her bonnet to the meadow - 

And the Juggler of Day is gone! 



It departs from the text of the packet copy thus (counting the line spacings 
in the Republican') : 

4. it's] her 7. it's] her 

5. kitchen] oriel 

PUBLICATION: There is no way of knowing who supplied the version 
printed in the Republican, discussed above. The copy supplied Cowan by 
Susan Dickinson also uses the phrase "oriel window/' and since it is un- 
likely that ED herself sent the copy, one conjectures that the lost copy to 
Sue was the source as well of the text in the Republican. The text in Poems 
(1891), 1 66, titled "The Juggler of Day/' reproduced the copy to Higgin- 
son, arranged as two quatrains. When Higginson was putting final edi- 
torial touches to the volume, he wrote on 18 July 1891 to Mrs. Todd CAB 
140): 

I have combined the two "Juggler of Day" poems, using the otter's 
window of course (oriel!!) & making the juggler a woman, as is 
proper. 

By "oriel" he has in mind the Cowan text quoted to him by Mrs. Todd. 
He obviously distrusted Cowan's memory. ED's variants "kitchen," "oriel," 
"Otter" all remain in fair copies nevertheless. 

When Mrs. Bianchi included the poem in CP (1924), 102, and later 
collections, she altered line 5 to conform with that in the packet copy, thus 
restoring "kitchen." In lines 4 and 7 "her" still remains. 



229 

A Burdock - clawed my Gown - 

Not Burdock's- blame - 

But mine 

Who went too near 

The Burdock's Den - 

A Bog -affronts my shoe- 
What else have Bogs -to do- 
The only Trade they fenow- 
The splashing Menl 
Ah, pity-ihenl 



"Tis Minnows can despisel 
The Elephant's -calm eyes 
Look further on! 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above (Bingham 85) is incor- 
porated in a note which ED wrote her brother Austin in 1861. It begins: 

Austin - 

Father said Frank Conkey - 
touched you - 

The poem follows and the note is signed "Emily-." Ithamar Francis 
Conkey, a lifelong resident of Amherst, was some six years older than 
Austin. He too practiced law, and from 1856 until his death in 1875 he 
was District Attorney for the Northwestern district of Massachusetts. 
Though he served in a multitude of town functions and on honorary 
committees with Edward Dickinson, there was a real political rivalry in 
their relationship. Edward Dickinson was a "straight" Whig in a period 
when "republican" Whigs considered "straight" Whigs out-of-date. Edward 
Dickinson was disturbed that Austin was becoming "touched" by the new 
republican brand. The poem seems to express ED's political sympathies, 
certainly to the extent that they line themselves in local or family loyalties. 
The poem was placed in packet 92 (Bingham yyd) about 1864: 

A Burdock twitched my Gown 

Not Burdock's blame - but mine 

Who went too near the Burdock's Den. 

A Bog affronts my shoe. 
What else have Bogs to do- 
The only art they know 
The splashing Men? 

'Tis Minnows - should despise - 
An Elephant's calm eyes 
Look further on. 

6. art] Trade 

The first line is a variant reading as is the eleventh, and she seems to have 
thought that "Trade" as she had originally written was a better word 
choice than "art." Note that in the later version she has omitted the 
personalized plea in the copy to Austin: the last line of the second stanza. 

[166] 



PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 73. It follows the text of the packet copy; 
the suggested change is rejected. 



230 

We -Bee and I -live by the quaffing - 

'Tis'nt all Hock -with us- 

Life has it's Ale- 

But it's many a lay of the Dim Burgundy - 

We chant -for cheer -when the Wines -f ail - 

Do we "get drunk"? 

Ask the jolly Clovers! 

Do we "beat" our 'Wife 7 

I - never wed - 

Bee -pledges his -in minute flagons - 

Dainty - as the tress - on her deft Head - 

While runs the Rhine - 

He and I- revel - 

First -at the vat -and latest at the Vine- 

Noon-our last Cup- 

"Founddead"-"of Nectar" - 

By a humming Coroner - 

In a By-Thyme! 

4] [But it's] dim chat of Things Burgund, we know - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 2ooa). 

PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIH (February 1929), 181; FP 
(1929), 61. The suggested change is rejected. The text is arranged in 
twenty-two lines, without stanza division. The italics in lines 9 and 10 are 
retained. Two words are altered: 

i. by] in 10. minute] minutest 



[167] 



God permits industrious Angels - 
Afternoons -to play- 
I met one -forgot my Schoolmates - 
All -for Him -straightway - 

God calls home -the Angels - promptly - 
At the Setting Sun - 
I missed mine -how dreary - Marbles - 
After playing Crown! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 2oob). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 127, titled "Playmates." The italics are 
not retained. 



232 

The Sun -just touched the Morning - 
The Morning -Happy thing - 
Supposed that He had come to dwell - 
And Life would all be Spring! 

She felt herself supremer- 
A Raised -Etherial Thingl 
Henceforth - for Her-Wfeat Holidayl 
Meanwhile - Her wheeling King - 
Trailed -slow -along the Orchards - 
His haughty - spangled Hems- 
Leaving a new nescessityl 
The want of Diademsl 

The Morning- fluttered -staggered- 
Felt feebly -lor Her Grown - 
Her unannointed forehead- 
Henceforth - Her only One! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 2ooc). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 116, titled "The Sun's \5(poing." The 

[168] 



text is arranged as four quatrains. No words are italicized. Two words in 
one line are altered: 

4. all be] be all 



The Lamp burns sure -within - 
Tho' Serfs -supply the Oil- 
It matters not the busy Wick- 
At her phospfhjoric toil! 

The Slave - forgets - to fill- 
The Lamp -burns golden -on - 
Unconscious that the oil is out- 
As that the Slave - is gone. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 2ood). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 17. 

234 

You're right -"the way is narrow" - 
And "difficult the Gate" - 
And "few there be" - Correct again - 
That "enter in -thereat" - 

'Tis Costly -So are jturplesl 

'Tis just the price of Breath - 

With but the "Discount" of the Grave - 

Termed by the Brokers -"Death"! 

And after that - there's Heaven - 
The Good Man's -"Dividend" - 
And Bad Men - "go to Jail" - 
I guess - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 203b). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 307. It is placed among the unfinished 
poems. Only "is" (line i ) is italicized. The final two words conclude line 
1 1 . The text derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 

[169] 



The Court is far away- 
No Umpire -have I- 
My Sovreign is off ended - 
To gain his grace -I'd die! 

I'll seek his royal feet- 

ril say -Remember- King - 

Thou shalt- thyself -one day -a Child - 

Implore a larger- thing - 

That Empire - is of Czars - 
As small -they say -as I- 
Grant me -that day -the royal ty- 
To intercede -for Thee- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 2043). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 164. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. The italics are not reproduced. Stanza three is en- 
closed in quotation marks. 

236 

If He dissolve - then - there is nothing- more - 
Eclipse -at Midnight - 
It was dark - before - 

Sunset at Easter - 
Blindness -on the Dawn- 
Faint Star of Bethlehem - 
Gone downl 

Would but some God -inform Him- 
Or it be too latel 
Say -that the pulse just lisps - 
The Chariots wait 

Say -that a little life -for His- 

Is leaking- red- [no stanza break] 

[170] 



His little Spaniel -tell Him! 
Will He heed'? 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 1 08 the first two stanzas only, arranged 
as couplets. The entire poem, arranged as couplets, is in New England 
Quarterly, XX (1947), 41; it derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 
ED's italics are not reproduced in either printing. One word is altered: 

ii. Chariots] chariot 



237 

I think just how my shape will rise - 
When I shall be "forgiven' - 
Till Hair -and Eyes -and timid Head- 
Are out of sight - in Heaven - 

I think just how my lips will weigh - 
With shapeless -quivering- prayer - 
That you - so late - "Consider" me - 
The "Sparrow" of your Care- 

I mind me that of Anguish - sent - 
Some drifts were moved away- 
Before my simple bosom- broke - 
And why not this -if they*? 

And so I con that thing - "forgiven" - 
Until - delirious - borne - 
By my long bright - and longer - trust - 
I drop my Hezit-unshrivenl 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 204^. 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 228. The italics are not retained. The 
final stanza is altered thus: 

And so, until delirious borne 
I con that thing, "forgiven," 
Till with long fright and longer trust 
I drop my heart, unshriven! 



Kill your Balm - and it's Odors bless you - 
Bare your Jessamine -to the storm - 
And she will fling her maddest perfume - 
Haply-your Summer night to Charm - 

Stab the Bird - that built in your bosom - 
Oh, could you catch her last Refrain 
Bubble! "forgive" -"Some better" - Bubble! 
"Carol for Him -when I am gone"! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H yic). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 289. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



239 

"Heaven" -is what I cannot reach! 
The Apple on the Tree - 
Provided it do hopeless - hang - 
That -"Heaven" is -to Me! 

The Color, on the Cruising Cloud - 
The interdicted Land- 
Behind the Hill -the House behind - 
There -Paradise -is found! 

Her teazing Purples - Afternoons - 
The credulous - decoy - 
Enamored -of the Con juror - 
That spurned us -Yesterday! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H 7 id). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 17 the first two stanzas only, tided 
"Forbidden Fruit." All three stanzas are in New England Quarterly, XX 
(1947), 1 8, derived from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. In Poems one 
word is altered: 

6. Land] ground 
['7*1 



In NEQ land is restored, but another word is altered: 

ii. Conjuror] conqueror 



240 

Ah, Moon -and Star! 
You are very far- 
But were no one 
Farther than you - 
Do you think I'd stop 
For a Firmament - 
Or a Cubit -or so? 

I could borrow a Bonnet 
Of the Lark - 

And a Chamois' Silver Boot- 
And a stirrup of an Antelope - 
And be with you - Tonight! 

But, Moon, and Star, 

Though you're very far- 

There is one - farther than you - 

He -is more than a firmament - from Me- 

So I can never go! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1861. The copy 
reproduced above is in packet 8 (H 363). The second copy is in packet 
i 4 (H6 9 c): 

Ah, Moon -and Star! 

You are very far- 

But - were no one farther than you - 

Do you think I'd stop for a firmament - 

Or a Cubit -or so! 

I could borrow a Bonnet - of the Lark - 
And a Chamois* silver hoot- 
And a stirrup of an Antelope - 
And leap to you -tonight! 

But -Moon -and Star- 

Though you're very far- [no stanza break] 

[173] 



There is one -farther than you- 

He -is more than a firmament - from me- 

And I cannot go! 

The final lines of the second and third stanzas are variants. 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 94. It follows the text of the copy in packet 
8 and the line arrangement of the copy in packet 14. Three words are 
altered: 

4. farther] further 16. a] (omitted) 

15. farther] further 



2 4 I 

I like a look of Agony, 
Because I know it's true - 
Men do not sham Convulsion, 
Nor simulate, a Throe - 

The Eyes glaze once - and that is Death - 

Impossible to feign 

The Beads upon the Forehead 

By homely Anguish strung. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 32 (H 53b). Between the two 
stanzas, ED has crossed out "Death comes." 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 121, titled "Real." 



242 

When we stand on the tops of Things 
And like the Trees, look down - 
The smoke all cleared away from it- 
And Mirrorrs on the scene - 

Just laying light -no soul will wink 
Except it have the flaw- 
The Sound ones, like the Hills -shall stand - 
No Lightning, scares away - 



The Perfect, nowhere be afraid- 
They bear their dauntless Heads, 
Where others, dare not go at Noon, 
Protected by their deeds - 

The Stars dare shine occasionally 
Upon a spotted World - 
And Suns, go surer, for their Proof, 
As if an Axle, held - 

7. shall stand] stand up- n. go at Noon] walk at noon- 

8. scares] drives- 16. an Axle, held] A Muscle -held 
10. dauntless] fearless - / tranquil - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 32 (H 54c). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 268. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. In line 4 of the transcript Mrs. Todd left a blank 
where "Mirrorrs" is written; Mrs. Bingham supplies the word "sunset" in 
brackets. Two suggested changes are adopted: 

8. drives 10. tranquil 

One word is altered: 

ii. Where] When 



2-43 

IVe known a Heaven, like a Tent- 
To wrap it's shining Yards - 
Pluck up it's stakes, and disappear - 
Without the sound of Boards 
Or Rip of Nail -Or Carpenter - 
But just the miles of Stare - 
That signalize a Show's Retreat - 
In North America - 

No Trace -no Figment of the Thing 

That dazzled, Yesterday, 

No Ring -no Marvel - 

Men, and Feats- [no stanza break] 

[i75l 



Dissolved as utterly - 

As Bird's far Navigation 

Discloses just a Hue- 

A plash of Oars, a Gaiety - 

Then swallowed up, of View. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 32d). 

PUBLICATION: London Mercury, XIX (February 1929), 350; FP 
(1929), 34. It is without stanza division. One word is altered: 

17. of.] to 



244 

It is easy to work when the soul is at play -^- 
But when the soul is in pain - 
The hearing him put his playthings up 
Makes work difficult - then - 

It is simple, to ache in the Bone, or the Rind - 
But Gimblets- among the nerve- f : 
Mangle daintier - terribler - 
Like a Panther in the Glove - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 333). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 246. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



245 

I held a Jewel in my fingers - 

And went to sleep - 

The day was warm, and winds were prosy - 

I said "Twill keep" - 

I woke - and chid my honest fingers, 
The Gem was gone - 
And now, an Amethyst remembrance 
Is all I own - 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 35b). 

PUBLICATION: Independent, XLIH (5 February 1891), i; Poems 
( 1 89 1 ), 1 06, titled in both "The Lost Jewel", N 



246 

Forever at His side to walk 

The smaller of the two! 

Brain of His Brain - 

Blood of His Blood - 

Two lives - One Being - now - 

Forever of His fate to taste - 
If grief -the largest part- 
If joy -to put my piece away 
For that beloved Heart - 

All life - to know each other - 
Whom we can never learn - 
And bye and bye - a Change - 
Called Heaven - 
Rapt Neighborhoods of Men - 
Just finding out- what puzzled us- 
Without the lexicon! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 36c). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 148. The text is arranged as four stanzas of 
5, 4, 4, and 4 lines; in later collections, as three stanzas of 4, 4, and 6 
lines. One word is altered: 

14. Neighborhoods] neighborhood 



247 

What would I give to see his face? 

Fd give -I'd give my life -of course - 

But that is not enough! 

Stop just a minute -let me think! [no stanza break] 

[177] 



I'd give my biggest Bobolink! 

That makes two -Him -and Lifel 

You know who "June" is - 

Tel give her 

Roses a day from Zenzibar - 

And Lily tubes -like Wells - 

Bees - by the furlong - 

Straits of Bhie 

Navies of Butterflies - sailed thro'- 

And dappled Cowslip Dells - 

Then I have "shares" in Primrose "Banks" - 
Daffodil Dowries -spicy "Stocks" - 
Dominions - broad as Dew- 
Bags of Doubloons - adventurous Bees 
Brought me -from firmamental seas- 
And Purple -from Peru- 

Now have I bought it - 

"Shylock"? Say! 

Sign me the Bond! 

"I vow to pay 

To Her -who pledges this- 

One hour -of her Sovreign's face"! 

Extatic Contract! 

Niggard Grace! 

My Kingdoms worth of Bliss! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 37). 

PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIII (March 1929), 326; FP 
(1929), 150-151. The text is arranged as a thirty-five-line stanza; in later 
collections the line arrangement is restored but not the stanza division. 
Italics are retained only in lines 21 and 26. One word is altered: 

25. Her] him 



[178] 



248 

Why -do they shut Me out of Heaven? 
Did I sing -too loud? 
But -I can say a little "Minor" 
Timid as a Bird! 

Would'nt the Angels try me- 
Just - once - more - 
Just -see -if I troubled them- 
But dont-shut the door! 

Oh, if I -were the Gentleman 

In the "White Robe" - 

And they -were the little Hand -that knocked - 

Could -I- forbid? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 383). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 174. The text is arranged as three stanzas 
of 5, 4, 5 lines. In later editions the quatrains are restored. Three words are 
altered: 

3. say] sing 9. Gentleman] gentlemen 10. Robe] robes 



249 

Wild Nights-Wild Nights! 
Were I with thee 
Wild Nights should be 
Our luxury! 

Fu tile -the Winds - 
To a Heart in port- 
Done with the Compass - 
Done with the Chart! 

Rowing in Eden- 

Ah, the Sea! 

Might I but moor- Tonight - 

In Thee! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 3&b). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 97. The last word of line n is arranged 
as the first of line 12. When Mrs. Todd and Col. Higginson were select- 
ing poems for the volume, he evidently felt some reservation about including 
this one, for he wrote Mrs. Todd on 21 April 1891 G4B, 127): 

One poem only I dread a little to print that wonderful "Wild 
Nights," lest the malignant read into it more than that virgin 
recluse ever dreamed of putting there. Has Miss Lavinia any 
shrinking about it? You will understand & pardon my solicitude. 
Yet what a loss to omit it! Indeed it is not to be omitted. 



250 

I shall keep singing! 

Birds will pass me 

On their way to Yellower Climes - 

Each -with a Robin's expectation - 

I -with my Redbreast - 

And my Rhymes - 

Late -when I take my place in summer - 
But -I shall bring a fuller tune- 
Vespers-are sweeter than Matins - Signor - 
' Morning -only the seed of Noon- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 38c). 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 32. The first stanza is regularized as a 
quatrain. One word is altered: 

8. bring] sing 



251 

Over the fence - 

Strawberries - grow - 

Over the fence - 

I could climb -if I tried, I know- 

Berries are nice! 

[180] 



But -if I stained my Apron - 
God would certainly scold! 
Oh, dear, -I guess if He were a Boy- 
He'd- climb -if He could! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H s8d). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 90. The text, arranged as two quatrains, 
derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 



252 

I can wade Grief - 
Whole Pools of it - 
I'm used to that- \ 
But the least push of Joy 
Breaks up my feet - 
And I tip - drunken - 
Let no Pebble - smile - 
'Twas the New Liquor - 
That was all! 

Power is only Pain- 
Stranded, thro' Discipline, 
Till Weights -will hang- 
Give Balm -to Giants - 
And they'll wilt, like Men - 
Give Himmaleh- 
They'll Carry -Him! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H I26b). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 30, titled "The Test." 



253 

You see I cannot see -your lifetime - 
I must guess- 
How many times it ache for me - today - Confess - 
How many times for my far sake [no stanza break] 

[181] 



The brave eyes film - 

But I guess guessing hurts - 

Mine -get so dim! 

Too vague -the face- 
My own -so patient - covets - 
Too far -the strength - 
My timidness enfolds- 
Haunting the Heart - 
Like her translated faces- 
Teazing the want- 
It- only -can suffice! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 463). 

PUBLICATION: New York Herald Tribune Book Review, 10 March 
1929, page 4; FP (1929), 162. The text is arranged as three stanzas of 5, 
5, and 8 lines; in later collections, as four quatrains. One word is altered : 

13. translated] transplanted 



2 54 

"Hope" is the thing with feathers - 
That perches in the soul - 
And sings the tune without the words - 
And never stops -at all- 

And sweetest -in the Gale -is heard - 
And sore must be the storm - 
That could abash the little Bird 
That kept so many warm - 

I've heard it in the dullest land - 
And on the strangest Sea - 
Yet, never, in Extremity, 
It asked a crumb -of Me. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 46b). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 27, titled "Hope." 



255 

To die -takes just a little while - 
They say it does'nt hurt- 
It's only fainter -by degrees - 
And then -it's out of sight - 

A darker Ribbon -for a Day- 

A Crape upon the Hat- 

And then the pretty sunshine comes - 

And helps us to forget - 

The absent - mystic - creature - 
That but for love of us- 
Had gone to sleep - that soundest time - 
Without the weariness - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 46c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 126. 



256 

If I'm lost- now - 

That I was found - 

Shall still my transport be- 

That once - on me - those Jasper Gates 

Blazed open - suddenly - 

That in my awkward - gazing - face - 

The Angels -softly peered - 

And touched me with their fleeces, 

Almost as if they cared - 

I'm banished -now -you know it- 

How foreign that can be - 

You'll know -Sir -when the Savior's face 

Turns so -away from you- 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 46d). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 166. The text, arranged as three quatrains 
derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 



2-57 

Delight is as the flight - 
Or in the Ratio of it, 
As the Schools would say- 
The Rainbow's way - 
A Skein 

Flung colored, after Rain, 
Would suit as bright, 
Except that flight 
Were Aliment - 

"If it would last" 

I asked the East, 

When that Bent Stripe 

Struck up my childish 

Firmament - 

And I, for glee, 

Took Rainbows, as the common way, 

And empty Skies 

The Eccentricity - 

And so with Lives - 

And so with Butterflies - 

Seen magic -through the fright 

That they will cheat the sight - 

And Dower latitudes far on - 

Some sudden morn- 

Our portion -in the fashion- 

Done- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 743). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 77. The text is arranged as three stanzas of 
9, 10, and 9 lines; in later collections, as three seven-line stanzas. 



There's a certain Slant of light, 
Winter Afternoons- 
That oppresses, like the Heft 
Of Cathedral Tunes - 

Heavenly Hurt, it gives us- 
We can find no scar, 
But internal difference, 
Where the Meanings, are - 

None may teach it- Any - 
Tis the Seal Despair- 
An imperial affliction 
Sent us of the Air- 

When it comes, the Landscape listens - 
Shadows - hold their breath - 
When it goes, 'tis like the Distance 
On the look of Death - 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 106. Line 2 reads: 

On winter afternoons 
Two other alterations are: 

3. heft] weight 9. Any] anything 



259 

Good Night! Which put the Candle out? 
A jealous Zephyr -not a doubt - 
Ah, friend, you little knew 
How long at that celestial wick 
The Angels -labored diligent - 
Extinguished - now - for you! 

[185] 



It might -have been the Light House spark - 

Some Sailor -rowing in the Dark- 

Had importuned to see! 

It might -have been the waning lamp 

That lit the Drummer from the Camp 

To purer Reveille! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, identical in text, both 
transcribed into packets. That reproduced above, in packet 23 (H i27b), 
was written about 1861. The one below, in packet 18 (H 98d), was 
written about 1863. 

Good Night -Which put the Candle out? 
A jealous Zephyr -not a doubt - 
Ah, friend, You little knew 
How long at that celestial wick 
The Angels - labored diligent - 
Extinguished - now - for You - 

It might have been the Light House Spark - 

Some Sailor - rowing in the Dark- 

Had importuned to see- 

It might have been the waning Lamp 

That lit the Drummer -from the Camp- 

To purer Reveille - 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 64. 



260 

Read - Sweet - how others - strove - 

Till we -are stouter - 

What they- renounced - 

Till we -are less afraid - 

How many times they - bore the faithful witness - 

Till we -are helped - 

As if a Kingdom -cared! 

Read then -of faith - 

That shone above the fagot- [no stanza break] 

[186] 



Clear strains of Hymn 
The River could not drown 
Brave names of Men- 
And Celestial Women - 
Passed out of Record 
Into -Renown! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H nyc). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 32, titled "The Book of Martyrs." The 
text is arranged as two eight-line stanzas. 

261 

Put up my lute! 

What of -my Music! 

Since the sole ear I cared to charm - 

Passive -as Granite -laps My Music - 

Sobbing- will suit -as well as psalm! 

Would but the "Memnon" of the Desert - 

Teach me the strain 

That vanquished Him- 

When He -surrendered to the Sunrise- . - 

Maybe -that -would awaken -them! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H i2yd). 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 140. The text is arranged as two quatrains. 

262 

The lonesome for they know not What- 
The Eastern Exiles -be - 
Who strayed beyond the Amber line 
Some madder Holiday - 

And ever since -the purple Moat 
They strive to climb -in vain- 
As Birds -that tumble from the clouds 
Do fumble at the strain - 

[187] 



The Blessed Ether -taught them- 
Some Transatlantic Morn- ^ ' 
When Heaven -was too common -to miss- 
Too sure -to dote upon! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H i28b). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 130. The text is arranged as two stanzas of 
4 and 8 lines; in later collections the stanza division is abandoned. Two 
words are altered: 

5. Moat] West 7. tumble] tremble 



263 

A single Screw of Flesh 
Is all that pins the Soul 
That stands for Deity, to Mine, 
Upon my side the Vail - 

Once witnessed of the Gauze - 
It's name is put away 
As far from mine, as if no plight 
Had printed yesterday, 

In tender -solemn Alphabet, 
My eyes just turned to see, 
When it was smuggled by my sight 
Into Eternity - 

More Hands - to hold - These are but Two - 
One more new-mailed Nerve 
Just granted, for the Peril's sake 
Some striding - Giant - Love - 

So greater than the Gods can show, 
They slink before the Clay, 
That not for all their Heaven can boast 
Will let it's Keepsake -go 



[188] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 107. The misprint "screen" for "Screw" 
(line i ) is corrected in Poems (current). Two words are altered: 

4. Vail (Veil)] vale 18. slink] shrink 



264 

A Weight with Needles on the pounds - 
To push, and pierce, besides - 
That if die Flesh resist the Heft- 
The puncture- cool [l]y tries - 

That not a pore be overlooked 
Of all this Compound Frame- 
As manifold for Anguish - 
As Species - be - for name - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H io9c). 
PUBLICATION: L7P (1935), 18. Two words are altered: 

i. on] in 8. Species] spices 



265 

Where Ships of Purple -gently toss- 
On Seas of Daffodil - 
Fantastic Sailors- mingle - 
And then -the Wharf is still! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H i lob). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 161, titled "Sunset." 



266 

This -is the land -the Sunset washes - 
These -are the Banks of the Yellow Sea 
Where it rose -or whither it rushes - 
These -are the Western Mystery! 

[189] 



Night after Night 

Her purple traffic 

Strews the landing with Opal Bales - 

Merchantmen -poise upon Horizons - 

Dip and vanish like Orioles! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H noc). There is a verbal 
echo in the second stanza of these lines from Tennyson's Locksley Hall: 

Saw the heavens fill with commerce, argosies of magic sails, 
Pilot of the purple twilight, dropping down with costly bales. 

PUBLICATION: This is one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393, tided "The Sea of Sunset." Two words 
are altered: 

8. like Orioles] with airy sails 

It was issued in Poems (1890), 84, with the same tide, likewise arranged 
as two quatrains. The altered words were again altered: 

with fairy sails 
All later editions follow the text in Poems (1890). 



267 

Did we disobey Him? 
Just one time! 

Charged us to forget Him - 
But we could'nt learn! 

Were Himself - such a Dunce - 
What would we - do? 
Love the dull lad - best - 
Oh, wouldn't you? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H nof). 
PUBLICATION: EM (1945), 163. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 

[190] 



268 

Me, change! Me, alter! 

Then I will, when on the Everlasting Hill 

A Smaller Purple grows- 

At sunset, or a lesser glow 

Flickers upon Cordillera - 

At Day's superior close! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861 (Bingham 102-32). It is written on a half- 
page of stationery. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 147, "Then I will" (line 2) concludes 
line i. 



269 

Bound -a trouble - 

And lives can bear it! 

Limit - how deep a bleeding go! 

So - many drops - of vital scarlet - 

Deal with the soul 

As with Algebra! 

Tell it the Ages -to a cypher - 
And it will ache -con ten ted- on - 
Sing - at it's pain - as any Workman - 
Notching the fall of the Even Sun! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two. The copy reproduced above is the 
earlier, written about 1861. Both versions are in packets; the earlier in 
packet 15 (H 78d), the later in packet 18 (H 97c), written about 1863. 
ED transcribed the earlier version onto the last page of a sheet on which 
the other three poems were entered about 1860. The first stanzas of the 
two versions are markedly different. The later version, below, was set down 
in a semifinal state. 

Bound a Trouble -and Lives will bear it- 
Circumscription - enables Wo - 
Still to anticipate - Were no limit - 
Who were sufficient to Misery? 



State it the Ages -to a cipher - 
And it will ache - contented on- 
Sing, at it's pain, as any Workman- 
Notching the fall of the Even Sun- 

3. anticipate] conjecture 4. were sufficient to] could begin on- 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 22. It follows the text of the later version, 
adopting the suggested change for line 3. Two words are altered: 

2. enables] enable 7. as] like 

The first stanza of the earlier version arranged as a quatrain, is in AB 
(1945), 392, derived from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 



270 

One Life of so much Consequence! 
Yet I -for it -would pay- 
My Soul's entire income - 
In ceaseless- salary - 

One Pearl - to me - so signal - 
That I would instant dive- 
Although - 1 knew - to take it - 
Would cost me -just a lifel 

The Sea is full - 1 know it! 
That -does not blur my Geml 
It burns -distinct from all the row- 
Intact-in Diademl 

The life is thick -I know it! 
Yet -not so dense a crowd ~ 
But Monarch -are perceptible - 
Far down the dustiest Road! 

5. to me - so signal] of such proportion 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 37 (H 2033). 

PUBLICATION: New York Herald Tribune Book Review, 10 March 



1929, page 4; FP (1929), 142. The suggested change is adopted. The text 
is printed without stanza division, and only knew (line 7) is italicized. 
Two words are altered: 

2. Yet] That 13. The] Oh 



271 

A solemn thing - it was - 1 said - 

A Woman - white - to be- 

And wear if God should count me fit 

Her blameless mystery - 

A timid thing - to drop a life 

Into the mystic well- 

Too plummetless - that it come back - 

Eternity -until - 

I pondered how the bliss would look- 
And would it feel as big- 
When I could take it in my hand- 
As hovering - seen - through fog - 

And then - the size of this "small" life - 
The Sages - call it small - 
Swelled -like Horizons -in my breast - 
And I sneered - softly - "small"! 

5. timid] "hallowed 12. hovering] glimmering 

6. mystic] purple 15. breast] vest 

7. come back] return 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H 7ia). ED underlined four 
suggested changes. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 97, titled "Wedded." The first two 
stanzas only are there printed. In attempting to adopt the first two suggested 
changes, Mrs. Todd mistook the alternate for "timid" as one for "blame- 
less" in the line preceding. Lines 4 and 5 therefore read: 

Her hallowed mystery. 

A timid thing to drop a life 

[193] 



The suggested change for line 6 is adopted. The entire poem was first 
published in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 23, with the missing 
stanzas supplied from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. One word is 
omitted: 

1 6. softly 



272 

I breathed enough to take the Trick - 
And now, removed from Air- 
I simulate the Breath, so well - 
That One, to be quite sure - 

The Lungs are stirless - must descend 
Among the Cunning Cells- 
And touch the Pantomime - Himself , 
How numb, the Bellows feels! 

8. numb] cool- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H 7ib). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 179. The suggested change is adopted. 
One word is altered: 

i. take] learn 



2-73 

He put the Belt around my life - 
I heard the Buckle snap - 
And turned away, imperial, 
My Lifetime folding up - 
Deliberate, as a Duke would do 
A Kingdom's Title Deed- 
Henceforth, a Dedicated sort- 
A Member of the Cloud. 

Yet not too far to come at call - 

And do the little Toils [no stanza 

That make the Circuit of the Rest - fcrlafe] 



And deal occasional smiles 

To lives that stoop to notice mine - 

And kindly ask it in - 

Whose invitation, know you not 

For Whom I must decline? 

3] And left his process - satisfied - 13. that stoop] As stoop - 

9. Yet not too far] Yet, near enough - 15. know you not] For this world - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H 75a). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 105. All suggested changes are rejected. 
One word is altered: 

15. know] knew 



274 

The only Ghost I ever saw 
Was dressed in Mechlin- so - 
He had no sandal on his foot- 
And stepped like flakes of snow- 

His Mien, was soundless, like the Bird- 
But rapid -like the Roe- 
His fashions, quaint, Mosaic - 
Or haply, Mistletoe - 

His conversation - seldom - 
His laughter, like the Breeze 
That dies away in Dimples 
Among the pensive Trees - 

Our interview - was transient - 
Of me, himself was shy- 
And God forbid I look behind - 
Since that appalling Day! 

3. had] wore- 5. the] a- 

5. Mien] Gait- 12. pensive] smiling - 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H 75b). 



PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 191. The suggested changes in lines 3 
and 5 are adopted. The text is arranged as two eight-line stanzas. 



Doubt Me! My Dim Companion! ' --+ 
Why, God, would be content 
With but a fraction of the Life - 
Poured thee, without a stint - 
The whole of me - forever - 
What more the Woman can, 
Say quick, that I may dower thee 
With last Delight I own! 

It cannot be my Spirit - 
For that was thine, before - 
I ceded all of Dust I knew- 
What Opulence the more 
Had I -a freckled Maiden, 
Whose farthest of Degree, 
Was -that she might - 
Some distant Heaven, 
Dwell timidly, with thee! 

Sift her, from Brow to Barefoot! 
Strain till your last Surmise- 
Drop, like a Tapestry, away, 
Before the Fire's Eyes- 
Winnow her finest fondness - 
But hallow just the snow 
Intact, in Everlasting flake - 
Oh, Ca viler, for you! 

i . Dim Companion] faint Companion - 7. that I may] so I can - 

3. of the Life] of the love- 8. last Delight] least Delight - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H 763). In line 19 "your" 
replaces "her" which ED had first written, then crossed out. 

PUBLICATION: Stanzas i and 2 are in Poems (1890), 47, titled "Sur- 



render." The suggested change for line 3 is adopted. One word is altered: 

13. freckled] humble 

Stanza 3 is in BM (1945), 168. It derives from a typescript made by Mrs. 
Todd. The text is arranged as two quatrains. One word is altered: 

25. Caviler] cavalier 



Many a phrase has the English language - 
I have heard but one - 
Low as the laughter of the Cricket, 
Loud, as the Thunder's Tongue - 

Murmuring, like old Caspian Choirs, 
When the Tide's a lull - 
Saying itself in new inflection - 
Like a Whippowil- 

Breaking in bright Orthography 
On my simple sleep - 
Thundering it's Prospective - 
Till I stir, and weep- 

Not for the Sorrow, done me - 
But the push of Joy- 
Say it again, Saxon! 
Hush -Only to me! 

12. stir] Grope - / start - 14. push of Joy] Pain of joy - 

15. Saxon] English language - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H y6b). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 89. All suggested changes are rejected. 
Alterations are made in two lines: 

n. Prospective] perspective 14. But the push] But for the push 



277 

What if I say I shall not wait! 
What if I burst the fleshly Gate- 
And pass escaped to thee! 

What if I file this Mortal- off - 

See where it hurt me That's enough - 

And step in Liberty! 

They cannot take me - any more! 
Dungeons can call -and Guns implore - 
Unmeaning - now - to me - 

As laughter was - an hour ago - 
Or Laces - or a Travelling Show - 
Or who died - yesterday! 

6. step] wade 8. can] may 

7. me] us 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 107. The suggested changes are adopt 
The text is arranged as two six-line stanzas. 



278 

A Shady friend - for Torrid days - 
Is easier to find- 
Than one of higher temperature 
For Frigid - hour of Mind - 

The Vane a little to the East - 
Scares Muslin souls -away - 
If Broadcloth Hearts are firmer - 
Than those of Organdy - 

Who is to blame? The Weaver? 
Ah, the bewildering thread! 
The Tapestries of Paradise 
So notelessly are made! 

7. Hearts] Breasts 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 14 (H 69d). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 57. The suggested change is adopted. 



279 

Tie the Strings to my Life, My Lord, 
Then, I am ready to go! 
Just a look at the Horses - 
Rapid! That will do! 

Put me in on the firmest side - 
So I shall never fall - 
For we must ride to the Judgment - 
And it's partly, down Hill - 

But never I mind the steepest - 
And never I mind the Sea - 
Held fast in Everlasting Race- 
By my own Choice, and Thee- 

Goodbye to the Life I used to live - 
And the World I used to know - 
And kiss the Hills, for me, just once 
Then -I am ready to go! 

5. firmest] tightest/ highest- 9. steepest] Bridges 

8. And it's partly] And it's many a 15] Here's a keepsake for the Hills 

mile- 1 6. Then] Now 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 32 (H 533). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 174, titled "Farewell." The suggested 
changes for lines 9 and 16 are adopted. In line 5 "in" is omitted. 



280 

[ felt a Funeral, in my Brain, 

!\nd Mourners to and fro 

Kept treading -treading -till it seemed 

That Sense was breaking through - 



And when they all were seated, 
A Service, like a Drum- 
Kept beating -beating -till I thought 
My Mind was going numb - 

And then I heard them lift a Box 
And creak across my Soul 
With those same Boots of Lead, again, 
Then Space -began to toll, 

As all the Heavens were a Bell, 
And Being, but an Ear, 
And I, and Silence, some strange Race 
Wrecked, solitary, here- 

And then a Plank in Reason, broke, 
And I dropped down, and down - 
And hit a World, at every plunge, 
And Finished knowing - then - 

19. plunge] Crash- 20. Finished] Got through - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 32 (H 53c). In line 10 ED first 
wrote "Brain," then crossed it out and substituted "Soul." 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 168. Stanza 5 is omitted. The entire 
poem, derived from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd, is in New England 
Quarterly, XX (1947), 26-27; the suggested changes are rejected. 



281 

"Tis so appalling -it exhilirates- 

So over Horror, it half Captivates - 

The Soul stares after it, secure 

To know the worst, leaves no dread more- 

To scan a Ghost, is faint - 
But grappling, conquers it 
How easy, Torment, now - 
Suspense kept sawing so- 

[200] 



The Truth, is Bald, and Cold 
But that will hold- 
If any are not sure - 
We show them -prayer - 
But we, who know, 
Stop hoping, now- 

Looking at Death, is Dying - 
Just let go the Breath - 
And not the pillow at your Cheek 
So Slumbereth - 

Others, Can wrestle - 

Your's, is done - 

And so of Wo, bleak dreaded - come, 

It sets the Fright at liberty - 

And Terror's free- 

Gay, Ghastly, Holiday! 

2. it half Captivates] it dumb fascinates- 4] A Sepulchre, fears frost, no more- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 32 (H 543). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 146. The suggested changes are rejected. 
The text is arranged without stanza division. 



282 

How noteless Men, and Pleiads, stand, 
Until a sudden sky 
Reveals the fact that One is rapt 
Forever from the Eye- 

Members of the Invisible, 
Existing, while we stare, 
In Leagueless Opportunity, 
O'ertakeless, as the Air- 

Why did'nt we detain Them? 

The Heavens with a smile, [no stanza break] 

[201] 



Sweep by our disappointed Heads 
Without a syllable - 

9. detain Them] retain them-/ [detain] it 12] But deign no syllable 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 32 (H 54b). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 90. The text, arranged as three stanzas of 
5, 4, and 5 lines, in later collections is restored as quatrains. The suggested 
change for line 12 is adopted. One word is altered: 

3. rapt] wrapt 



283 

A Mien to move a Queen 
Half Child -Half Heroine - 
An Orleans in the Eye 
That puts it's manner by 
For humbler Company 
When none are near 
Even a Tear- 
It's frequent Visitor - 

A Bonnet like a Duke- 

And yet a Wren's Peruke 

Were not so shy 

Of Goer by - 

And Hands -so slight - 

They would elate a Sprite 

With Merriment - 

A Voice that Alters -Low 

And on the Ear can go 

Like Let of Snow- 

Or shift supreme - 

As tone of Realm 

On Subjects Diadem - 

Too small - to fear - 

Too distant -to endear- [no stanza break] 

[202] 



And so Men Compromise - 
And just -revere - 

17. can] doth 24] And Men - too Brigadier - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 32a). 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 41. It is without stanza division and the 
suggested changes are rejected. One word is altered: 

1 8. Let] set 



284 

The Drop, that wrestles in the Sea - 
Forgets her own locality - 
As I - toward Thee - 

She knows herself an incense small - 
Yet small - she sighs - if All - is All - 
How larger -be"? 

The Ocean - smiles - at her Conceit 
But she, forgetting Amphitrite - 
Pleads -" 



MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1861. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham) is a final draft sent to an unidentified recipient. 
It is a redaction of the semifinal draft in packet 8 (H 32b); it adopts the 
suggested change in line 4 and incorporates one not previously suggested, 
in line 3: 

The Drop, that wrestles in the Sea - 
Forgets her own locality 
As I, in Thee - 

She knows herself an Offering small - 
Yet small she sighs, if All, is All, 
How larger - be? 

The Ocean, smiles at her conceit - 
But she, forgetting Amphitrite - 
Pleads "Me"> 

4. Offering] incense 

[203] 



PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 146. The text derives from a transcript 
Mrs. Todd made of the packet copy. The suggested change is rejected. 

285 

The Robin's my Criterion for Tune 

Because I grow -where Robins do- 

But, were I Cuckoo born - 

I'd swear by him - 

The ode familiar -rules the Noon- 

The Buttercup's, my Whim for Bloom - 

Because, we're Orchard sprung - 

But, were I Britain born, 

I'd Daisies spurn - 

None but the Nut -October fit- 

Because, through dropping it, 

The Seasons flit -I'm taught - 

Without the Snow's Tableau 

Winter, were lie -to me- 

Because I see -New Englandly- 

The Queen, discerns like me- 

Provincially - 

9. Daisies spurn] Clovers - scorn - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 32c). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 60. The suggested change is rejected. The 
last two words of line 6, printed as a separate line, are restored to the line 
in later collections. Three words are altered: 

i. for] of 5. Noon] morn 

10. fit] fits 



286 

That after Horror -that 'twas us- 
That passed the mouldering Pier- 
Just as the Granite Crumb let go- 
Our Savior, by a Hair- 

[204] 



A second more, had dropped too deep 
For Fisherman to plumb- 
The very profile of the Thought 
Puts Recollection numb- 

The possibility -to pass 
Without a Moment's Bell- 
Into Conjecture's presence - 
Is like a Face of Steel - 
That suddenly looks into our's 
With a metallic grin - 
The Cordiality of Death - 
Who drills his Welcome in- 

16. drills] nails 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above, in packet 8 (H 330), 
entered there about 1861, is a poem of 16 lines, arranged as two quatrains 
and an 8-line conclusion, with an alternate reading suggested for "drills/* 
The copy to T. W. Higginson (BPL Higg 58), below, concludes a letter 
written early in 1863, signed "Barabbas" because ED fancies she owes an 
apology: ". . . might I be the one you tonight, forgave, 'tis a Better Honor 
- Mine is but just the Thief's Request - ." The word "nails" suggested as 
an alternate for "drills" in the packet copy is not adopted: 

The possibility to pass 
Without a Moment's Bell- 
Into Conjecture's presence - 
Is like a face of steel 
That suddenly looks into our's 
With a Metallic Grin- 
The Cordiality of Death 
Who Drills his welcome -in - 

PUBLICATION: The text to Higginson is in Letters (ed. 1894), 3 I2 > 
(ed. 1931), 281; also LL (1924), 268. The packet copy furnished the text 
in UP (1935), 145, where it is arranged as four quatrains. The suggested 
change is rejected. The first line reads: "That after horror that was Us-." 



[205] 



28 7 

A Clock stopped - 
Not the Mantel's- 
Geneva's farthest skill 
Cant put the puppet bowing - 
That just now dangled still - 

An awe came on the Trinket! 
The Figures hunched, with pain- 
Then quivered out of Decimals - 
Into Degreeless Noon- 

It will not stir for Doctor's - 
This Pendulum of snow - 
The Shopman importunes it- 
While cool - concernless No - 

Nods from the Gilded pointers - 
Nods from the Seconds slim- 
Decades of Arrogance between 
The Dial life - 
And Him- 

14. Nods] stares 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 220). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 192. The suggested change is rejected 
and the stanzas are regularized into four quatrains. 



288 

I'm Nobody! Who are you? 

Are you - Nobody - too? 

Then there's a pair of us! 

Dont tell! they'd banish us -you know! 

How dreary -to be -Somebody! 

How public -like a Frog- [no stanza break] 

[ao6] 



To tell your name -the livelong June- 
To an admiring Bog! 

4. banish us] advertise 7. your] one's 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 8 (H 353). The Springfield Daily 
Republican for 23 January 1858 published a poem by Charles Mackay 
titled "Little Nobody/' containing the lines: 

Who would be a Somebody r> - Nobody am I. 

It is possible that ED's poem owes its inspiration to the earlier verse. 
Bowles's Republican was the standard newspaper in the Dickinson house- 
hold. 

PUBLICATION: Life, XVII (5 March 1891), 146, titled "Nobody"; Poems 
(1891), 21, without title. Though ED underlined both suggested changes, 
neither is adopted. One word is altered: 

7. June] day 



289 

I know some lonely Houses off the Roa4 

A Robber'd like the look of- 

Wooden barred, 

And Windows hanging low, 

Inviting to - 

A Portico, 

Where two could creep - 

One -hand the Tools - 

The other peep - 

To make sure All's Asleep - 

Old fashioned eyes - 

Not easy to surprise! 

How orderly the Kitchen'd look, by night, 

With just a Clock - 

But they could gag the Tick- 

And Mice wont bark- 

And so the Walls -dont tell- 

None - will - 

[207] 



A pair of Spectacles ajar just stir - 

An Almanac's aware - 

Was it the Mat -winked, 

Or a Nervous Star? 

The Moon - slides down the stair, 

To see who's there! 

There's plunder where 

Tankard, or Spoon - 

Earring -or Stone- 

A Watch -Some Ancient Brooch 

To match the Grandmama- 

Staid sleeping - there - 

Day -rattles -too 
Stealth's- slow - 
The Sun has got as far 
As the third Sycamore - 
Screams Chanticleer 
"Who's there"? 

And Echoes - Trains away, 

Sneer -"Where"! 

While the old Couple, just astir, 

Fancy the Sunrise - left the door ajar! 

10. make sure All's Asleep] Guage the 28. Ancient] Antique - 

sleep - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 1263). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 28-29, titled "The Lonely House/' Both 
suggested changes are rejected. In line 19 "ajar," rendered "afar" in the 
first three impressions, was corrected in the fourth. When Mrs. Bianchi 
issued the poem in CP (1924), she made one alteration in the last line 
which has been retained in all later collections: 

Fancy] Think that 
[208] 



290 

Of Bronze -and Blaze - 
The North - Tonight - 
So adequate -it forms - 
So preconcerted with itself 
So distant -to alarms - 
An Unconcern so sovreign 
To Universe, or me- 
Infects my simple spirit 
With Taints of Majesty - 
Till I take vaster attitudes - 
And strut upon my stem- 
Disdaining Men, and Oxygen, 
For Arrogance of them - 

, My Splendors, are Menagerie - 
\ But their Competeless Show 
i Will entertain the Centuries 
When I, am long ago, 
' An Island in dishonored Grass - 
/ Whom none but Daisies, know* 

10. attitudes] manners 19. Daisies] Beetles - 

1 8. An] Some- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 74c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 133, titled "Aurora." All suggested 
changes are rejected. Three words are altered: 

3. it] its 9. taints] tints 

8. Infects] It paints 

In current editions the text appears as three stanzas of 7, 6, 6 lines because 
in the Centenary edition (1930) the first seven lines are at the bottom of 
page 121 and the rest on page 122. 



[209] 



29 1 

How the old Mountains drip with Sunset 
How the Hemlocks burn- 
How the Dun Brake is draped in Cinder 
By the Wizard Sun - 

How the old Steeples hand the Scarlet 
Till the Ball is full- 
Have I the lip of the Flamingo 
That I dare to tell? 

Then, how the Fire ebbs like Billows - 
Touching all the Grass 
With a departing - Sapphire - feature - 
As a Duchess passed - 

How a small Dusk crawls on the Village 
Till the Houses blot 
And the odd Flambeau, no men carry 
Glimmer on the Street- 

How it is Night - in Nest and Kennel - 
And where was the Wood- 
Just a Dome of Abyss is Bowing 
Into Solitude - 

These are the Visions flitted Guido - 
Titian -never told- 
Domenichino dropped his pencil - 
Paralyzed, with Gold- 

3. is draped in Cinder] Is tipped in 20] back of Solitude 

Tinsel At the 

4] By the Setting Sun- After - 

19. Bowing] nodding Unto 

19] Acres of Masts are standing next to- 

21. Visions flitted] Fashions - baffled - 
24] Powerless to unfold- 



[210] 



.MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H 1293). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 134-135. Three suggested changes 
are adopted: 

19. Bowing] nodding 24] Powerless to unfold 
21. flitted] baffled 

There are many alterations: 

2-3] And the brake of dun! 12] As if a duchess pass 

How the hemlocks are tipped in 16. Street] spot 

tinsel 17. How] Now 



292 

' If your Nerve, deny you - 
Go above your Nerve - 
He can lean against the Grave, 
If he fear to swerve - 

That's a steady posture - 
Never any bend 
Held of those Brass arms- 
Best Giant made - 

If your Soul seesaw - 

Lift the Flesh door- 

The Poltroon wants Oxygen - 

Nothing more- 

6. any] one- 9. seesaw] stagger 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 23 (H i29c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 12. Both suggested changes are rejected. 
One word is altered: 

3. He] You 



293 

I got so I could hear his name - 
Without -Tremendous gain- 
That Stop-sensation -on my Soul- 

And Thunder -in the Room- 

i 

[211] 



I got so I could walk across 

That Angle in the floor, 

Where he turned so, and I turned - how - 

And all our Sinew tore- 

I got so I could stir the Box- 

In which his letters grew 

Without that forcing, in my breath - 

As Staples - driven through- 

Could dimly recollect a Grace - 
I think, they call it "God"- 
Renowned to ease Extremity - 
When Formula, had f ailed - 

And shape my Hands - 
Petition's way, 
Tho* ignorant of a word 
That Ordination - utters - 

My Business, with the Cloud, 

If any Power behind it, be, 

Not subject to Despair - 

It care, in some remoter way, 

For so minute affair 

As Misery - 

Itself, too great, for interrupting - more - 

i. hear] think -/ take - 16. Formula, had failed] Filament - 

7. turned -how] let go- had f ailed - 

13. Grace] Force 23. Not subject to] Supremer than - 
1 5. to ease Extremity] to stir - Extrem- Superior to - 

ity- 27. great] vast 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H 1093). 

PUBLICATION: London Mercury, XIX (February 1929), 357; New 
York Herald Tribune Book Review, 10 March 1929, page 4; FP (1929), 
183-184. The text is arranged as six stanzas of 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, and 9 lines; in 
later collections, as six stanzas of 5, 4, 4, 4, 4, and 8 lines. Only the 
suggested change for line 27 is adopted. Two words are altered: 

3. on] in 19. of a] of 



The serious misreading in the final stanza may in part be accounted for 
by the fact that in this poem ED placed her alternative readings marginally 
beside the lines without specific markers. The printed version of the final 
stanza reads: 

If any Power behind it be 

Not subject to despair, 

It care 

In some remoter way 

For so minute affair 

As misery - 

Itself too vast for interrupting more, 

Supremer than 

Superior to 

In the Centenary edition (1930) an d later collections another word is 
altered: 

24. It] To 



294 

The Doomed - regard the Sunrise 
With different Delight - 
Because -when next it burns abroad 
They doubt to witness it- 

The Man -to die - tomorrow - 
Harks for the Meadow Bird - 
Because it's Music stirs the Axe 
That clamors for his head - 

Joyful -to whom the Sunrise 
Precedes Enamored- Day - 
Joyful - for whom the Meadow Bird 
Has ought but Elegy! 

6. Harks for] Detects 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H i lod). 
PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIII (March 1929), 332; FP 
(1929), 95. The suggested change is adopted. 



295 

Unto like Story -Trouble has enticed me- 

How Kinsmen fell- 

Brothers and Sisters - who preferred the Glory - 

And their young will 

Bent to the Scaffold, or in Dungeons - chanted - 

Till God's full time- 

When they let go the ignominy smiling - 

And Shame went still - 

Unto guessed Crests, my moaning fancy, leads me, 

Worn fair 

By Heads rejected - in the lower country - 

Of honors there - 

Such spirit makes her perpetual mention, 

That I grown bold - 

Step martial -at my Crucifixion - 

As Trumpets - rolled - 

Feet, small as mine -have marched in Revolution 
Firm to the Drum- 

Hands-not so stout -hoisted them -in witness - 
When Speech went numb- 
Let me not shame their sublime deportments - 
Drilled bright- 
Beckoning- Etruscan invitation- 
Toward Light - 

5. chanted] waited- 9. leads] lures 

6. full time] whole - will - 13. Such] Some 
8. Shame] Scorn 24. Toward] to- 
8. still] dumb. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H in). Another suggested 
change, "tell," is offered for some word in line 12 or 13, but none is marked. 

PUBLICATION: UP (1945), 9. The suggested change for line 9 is 
adopted. One word is altered: 

14. bold] cold 
In line 13 "her" is omitted. 



296 

One Year ago -jots what? 
God -spell the word! I -cant - 
Was't Grace? Not that- 
Was't Glory? That -will do- 
Spell slower- Glory - 

Such Anniversary shall be- 

Sometimes not of ten -in Eternity - 

When farther Parted, than the Common Wo - 

Look - feed upon each other's faces - so - 

In doubtful meal, if it be possible 

Their Banquet's real - 

I tasted - careless - then - 

I did not know the Wine 

Came once a World - Did you? 

Oh, had you told me so- 

This Thirst would blister - easier - now - 

You said it hurt you - most - 

Mine- was an Acorn's Breast - 

And could not know how fondness grew 

In Shaggier Vest- 

Perhaps - 1 could'nt - 

But, had you looked in - 

A Giant - eye to eye with you, had been - 

No Acorn - then - 

So -Twelve months ago- 

We breathed - 

Then dropped the Air- 

Which bore it best? 

Was this -the patientest- 

Because it was a Child, you know- 

And could not value - Air? 



[215] 



If to be "Elder" - mean most pain - 

I'm old enough, today, I'm certain - then - 

As old as thee-how soon? 

One Birthday more - or Ten? 

Let me -choose! 

Ah, Sir, None! 

4. That -will do] 'Twas just you- n. real] True 

8. farther] sharper 27. dropped] lost 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H ii2a). Four expressions 
are marked for change, but none is given : 

i. jots what? 1 6. would blister 

12. tasted- 1 8. was an Acorn's Breast 

The suggested change for line 4 is tucked into the conclusion of line 5, 
but clearly marked; that for line 1 1 is placed beside "real" and beneath 
"possible." 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 159-160. The printed text derives from a 
transcript made by Mrs. Todd. Because the manuscript arrangement of 
the suggested changes offers some difficulties, the change offered for line 
4 has been adopted into the text of line 5, which reads: "Spell slower! 
Glory, 'twas just you!" The alternate suggestion for line 8 is rejected. 
That for line 1 1 was thought to go in line 10, so that the text of 10-1 1 reads: 

In doubtful meal, if it be true 
Their banquet's real. 

The alternate suggestion for line 27 is rejected. The poem is arranged 
into seven stanzas of 5, 6, 5, 4, 4, 7, 6 lines. 



297 

It's like the Light- 
A fashionless Delight - 
It's like the Bee- 
A dateless - Melody - 



[216] 



It's like the Woods - 
Private - Like the Breeze - 
Phraseless-yet it stirs 
The proudest Trees - 

t's like the Morning - 
Jest - when it's done - 
\nd the Everlasting Clocks - 
Dhime-Noon! 

12. Chime] Strike 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H i izb). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 120, titled "The Wind." The suggested 
change is rejected. Two words are omitted: 

6. the ii. And 



298 

Alone, I cannot be- 
The Hosts - do visit me - 
Recordless Company - 
Who baffle Key- 

They have no Robes, nor Names - 
No Almanacs - nor Climes - 
But general Homes 
Like Gnomes - 

Their Coming, may be known 
By Couriers within - 
Their going -is not- 
For they're never gone 
2. The] for- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861, in packet 20 (H i i2c). 

PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 255-256. The suggested change is rejected. 



299 

Your Riches - taught me - Poverty. 
Myself -a Millionaire 
In little Wealths, as Girls could boast 
Till broad as Buenos Ayre- 

You drifted your Dominions - 
A Different Peru - 
And I esteemed All Poverty 
For Life's Estate with you - 

Of Mines, I little know - myself - 
But just the names, of Gems - 
The Colors of the Commonest - 
And scarce of Diadems - 

So much, that did I meet the Queen - 
Her Glory I should know - 
But this, must be a different Wealth - 
To miss it -beggars so- 

Fm sure 'tis India - all Day - 
To those who look on You - 
Without a stint -without a blame, 
Might I - but be the Jew - 

I'm sure it is Golconda- 

Beyond my power to deem - 

To have a smile for Mine - each Day, 

How better, than a Gem! 

At least, it solaces to know 
That there exists - a Gold - 
Altho' I prove it, just in time 
It's distance - to behold - 

It's far- far Treasure to surmise - 

And estimate the Pearl- [no stanza break] 



That slipped my simple fingers through - 
While just a Girl at School. 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above (H 47a), in packet 26, 
was written about July, 1862. The handwriting and the text are identical 
with a copy (BPL Higg 6) enclosed with three other poems in a letter to 
T. W. Higginson (BPL Higg 54) in July 1862: 

Your Riches - taught me- poverty - 

Myself a Millionaire - 

In little wealths -as Girls could boast - 

Till broad as Buenos -Ayre- 

You drifted your Dominions 

A different Peru- 

And I esteemed all poverty - 

For Life's Estate, with you- 

Of Mines, I little know, myself - 

But just the names -of Gems- 

The Colors -of the Commonest - 

And scarce of Diadems - 

So much -that did I meet the Queen - 

Her glory -I should know- 

But this, must be a different wealth - 

To miss it, beggars so- 

Tm sure 'tis India -all day- 

To those who look on you- 

Without a stint - without a blame - 

Might I -but be the Jew! 

I'm sure it is Golconda 

Beyond my power to deem - 

To have a smile for mine, each day - 

How better, than a Gem! 

At least, it solaces to know- 

That there exists -a Gold- 

Although I prove it just in time 

It's distance -to behold! 

It's far -far Treasure to surmise - 

And estimate the Pearl - 

That slipped my simple fingers through - 

While just a Girl at School! 

The third copy (H B 44) seems to have been written somewhat earlier, 
perhaps in March of the same year. Four words in the text differ from 



words used in the later copies. It is headed, "Dear Sue./' and concludes 
with the note: 

Dear Sue - 
You see I remember - 
Emily. 

It has been plausibly suggested that this poem was written in memory of 
Benjamin Franklin Newton, ED's "earliest friend" (see George Frisbie 
Whicher, This Was a Poet [Scribner's, 1939], 92). Newton had been a 
law student in the office of Edward Dickinson during the years 1847-1848. 
He removed to Worcester in 1850, was married in the following year, and 
died of consumption on 24 March 1853, m tne thirty-third year of his 
life. It was he who introduced Emily to the writings of the Bronte sisters, 
presented her with a copy of Emerson's poems, and awakened in her the 
delight in literature which later made her call him the "friend who taught 
me Immortality." ED's memory of anniversaries was unfailing and so often 
demonstrated that there is a real probability, especially in the light of 
ED's note accompanying the copy to Sue, that this poem was composed 
for the ninth anniversary of Newton's death. 

Your - Riches - taught me - poverty! 

Myself, a "Millionaire" 

In little - wealths - as Girls can boast - 

Till broad as "Buenos Ayre" 

You drifted your Dominions - 

A Different- Peru - 

And I esteemed - all - poverty - 

For Life's Estate -with you! 

Of "Mines"-! little know- myself - 

But just the names -of Gems- 

The Colors -of the Commonest - 

And scarce of Diadems - 

So much -that did I meet the Queen - 

Her glory -I should know- 

But this -must be a different Wealth - 

To miss it - beggars - so! 

I'm sure 'tis "India" -all day- 

To those who look on you- 

Without a stint - without a blame - 

Might I -but be the Jew! 

I know it is "Golconda"- 

Beyond my power to dream - [no stanza break] 

[220] 



To have a smile -for mine -each day- 
How "better - than a Gem\ 

At least - it solaces - to know - 

That there exists -a Gold- 

Altho' I prove it, just in time - 

It's distance -to behold! 

It's f ar - far - Treasure - to surmise - 

And estimate - the Pearl - 

That slipped -my simple fingers -thro' 

While yet a Girl -at School! 

The four variant readings are: 

3. can] could 22. dream] deem 

21. I know] I'm sure 32. yet] just 

This poem seems to have verbal echoes of Sir Thomas Browne's Religio 
Medici (Part 2, section 13): 

I was not born unto riches, neither is it I think my Star to be wealthy 
... I have not Peru in my desires, but a competence, and ability to 
perform those good works to which he hath inclined my nature. He 
is rich, who hath enough to be charitable . . . 

PUBLICATION: The copy to Higginson was the source of the first 
publication of the poem in Atlantic Monthly, LXVIII (October 1891), 
446, and is there incorporated in an article which Higginson wrote dealing 
with the letters and poems he had received from ED. It was collected later 
in the year in Poems (1891), 91-92. This later printing follows the stanza 
division of the packet copy and may have derived from it, though Mrs. 
Todd wrote Col. Higginson on 18 May 1891 that she did not at that 
time have a copy of it (AB, 1 30). 



300 

"Morning" -means "Milking" - to the Farmer - 
Dawn - to the Teneriffe - 
Dice - to the Maid - 

Morning means just Risk -to the Lover - 
Just revelation - to the Beloved - 



[221] 



Epicures -date a Breakfast -by it- 

Brides-an Apocalypse - 

Worlds -a Flood - 

Faint-going Lives -Their lapse from Sighing - 

Faith - The Experiment of Our Lord - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The copy 
reproduced above is in packet 5 (H 382b). A variant copy in pencil (H 
288) is addressed and headed "Sue/* and signed "Emily": 

"Morning" - means "Milking" 
To the Farmer - 
Dawn -to the Appenine- 
Dice -to the Maid. 
"Morning" means, just -Chance 
To the Lover, 
Just - Revelation - 
To the Beloved - 

Epicures - date a Breakfast, by it! 

Heroes -a Battle - 

The Miller -A Flood - 

Faint going Eyes -their lapse -from sighing - 

Faith - the Experiment 

Of our Lord! 

Both in form and text the changes are many. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 39. The text follows the copy to Sue; it is 
arranged as an eleven-line stanza. 



I reason, Earth is short - 
And Anguish - absolute - 
And many hurt, 
But, what of that? 

I reason, we could die- 
The best Vitality 
Cannot excel Decay, 
But, what of that? 

[222] 



[ reason, that in Heaven - 
Somehow, it will be even - 
Some new Equation, given - 
But, what of that? 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The copy 
reproduced above is in packet 13 (H 63d). The copy below (H 274), 
though without address or signature, presumably was sent to Sue. Lines 5 
and 7 are variants. 

I reason - 

Earth is short - 
And Anguish - absolute - 
And many- hurt - 
But, What of thafi 

I reason - 

We should die- 
The test -Vitality 
Could not excel Decay - 
But -What of that? 

I reason - 

That in "Heaven" - 
Somehow -it will be even- 
Some new Equation - given - 
But -What of that! 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 134. The text derives from the packet 
copy. 



302 

Like Some Old fashioned Miracle 
When Summertime is done- 
Seems Summer's Recollection 
And the Affairs of June 

As infinite Tradition 

As Cinderella's Bays - 

Or Little John - of Lincoln Green - 

Or Blue Beard's Galleries - 

[223] 



Her Bees have a fictitious Hum - 
Her Blossoms, like a Dream - 
Elate us - till we almost weep - 
So plausible - they seem - 

Her Memories like Strains - Review - 
When Orchestra is dumb - 
The Violin in Baize replaced - 
And Ear -and Heaven -numb - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The fair copy 
reproduced above (H B 178), sent to Sue, is addressed "Combined Girl." 
and signed "Emily ." The copy below is a semifinal draft in packet 13 
(H6 5 b): 

Like Some Old fashioned Miracle - 
When Summertime is done- 
Seems Summer's Recollection - 
And the Affairs of June - 

As infinite Tradition - as 
Cinderella's Bays- 
Or little John - of Lincoln-Green - 
Or Blue Beard's Galleries- 

Her Bees -have an illusive Hum- 
Her Blossoms - like a Dream 
Elate us -till we almost weep- 
So plausible - they seem- 

Her Memory -like Strains - enchant - 
Tho' Orchestra -be dumb- 
The Violin -in Baize - replaced - 
And Ear, and Heaven -numb - 

5. infinite] Bagatelles- 13. enchant] Review - 

12. plausible] exquisite 14. be] is 

13. Memory] Memories 

Of the five suggested changes in the packet copy, ED adopted only the 
last three in her fair copy. She made two further changes : 

9. an illusive] a fictitious 14. Tho'] When 



PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 65. The text derives from the copy to Sue. 
One line is altered: 

1 1 ] Elate until we almost weep 



303 

The Soul selects her own Society - 
Then -shuts the Door- 
To her divine Majority - 
Present no more - 

Unmoved - she notes the Chariots- pausing - 
At her low Gate - 

Unmoved an Emperor be kneeling 
Upon her Mat- 

Fve known her -from an ample nation - 
Choose One- 

Then - close the Valves of her attention - 
Like Stone - 

3. To] On 8] On [her] Rush mat 

4. Present] Obtrude n. Valves] lids- 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy above in packet 13 (H 65^ was written about 
1862. A fair copy of the first stanza only (H B i63b), written somewhat 
later, about 1864, was sent to Sue. In it ED rejects both suggested 
changes: 

The Soul selects her own Society 
Then shuts the Door 
To her divine Majority 
Present no more- 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 26, titled "Exclusion," The text derives 
from the packet copy. The suggested changes for lines 3 and 4 are adopted. 
Two words are altered: 

5. Chariots] chariot's 7. be! is 



[225] 



The Day came slow -till Five o'clock ~ 
Then sprang before the Hills 
Like Hindered Rubies -or the Light 
A Sudden Musket - spills - 

The Purple could not keep the East- 
The Sunrise shook abroad 
Like Breadths of Topaz -packed a Night - 
The Lady just unrolled - 

The Happy Winds -their Timbrels took- 
The Birds -in docile Rows 
Arranged themselves around their Prince 
The Wind - is Prince of Those - 

The Orchard sparkled like a Jew - 
How mighty 'twas -to be 
A Guest in this stupendous place - 
The Parlor - of the Day - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two autograph copies, both written about 
1862. The copy in packet 16 (H 86b), reproduced above, is identical with 
the copy to Sue (H 326) in text and capitalization. The latter is addressed 
"Sue," signed "Emily-," and has these differences in punctuation: 

ii. Prince] Prince- 15. Guest] Guest - 

14. 'twas-] 'twas 16. Day-] Day! 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 115, titled "Day's Parlor." Line 12 is 
enclosed in a parenthesis. Two words are altered: 

6. abroad] from fold 14. be] stay 



The difference between Despair 
And Fear -is like the One 
Between the instant of a Wreck - 
And when the Wreck has been - 

[226] 



The Mind is smooth -no Motion - 
Contented as the Eye 
Upon the Forehead of a Bust- 
That knows -it cannot see- 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, identical in text. That repro- 
duced above, in packet 16 (H Sjb), was written about 1862. The copy 
below in pencil (H 330), addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily-," was 
written about 1865. 

The difference between Despair 
And Fear, is like the One 
Between the instant of a Wreck 
And when the Wreck has been. 
The Mind is smooth - 
No motion - Contented as the Eye 
Upon the Forehead of a Bust- 
That knows it cannot see. 

There is a difference in the spacing in lines 5 and 6. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 26; LL (1924), 195-196. Both texts follow 
the stanza division and line spacing of the packet copy. 



306 

The Soul's Superior instants 
Occur to Her -alone 
When friend -and Earth's occasion 
Have infinite withdrawn - 

Or She -Herself -ascended 
To too remote a Hight 
For lower Recognition 
Than Her Omnipotent - 

This Mortal Abolition 
Is seldom -but as fair 
As Apparition -subject 
To Autocratic Air- 



Eternity's disclosure 
To favorites -a few- 
Of the Colossal substance 
Of Immortality 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two. The fair copy reproduced above (H 
350), addressed "Sue-" and signed "Emily./' was written about 1863. 
It is a redaction of a semifinal copy in packet 17 (H 9oa), written about 
1862, which offers two alternative readings: 

7. Recognition] Interruption 14] To a Revering - Eye 

In the fair copy ED rejects the first suggested change and adopts the sec- 
ond. Otherwise, the two copies are identical in text and form, except that 
the last line of the packet copy concludes with a dash. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 35. It follows the text of the fair copy. 



307 

The One who could repeat the Summer day 
Were greater than itself -though He 
Minutest of Mankind should be - 

And He -could reproduce the Sun- 

At period of going down - 

The Lingering - and the Stain -I mean- 

When Orient have been outgrown - 
And Occident -become Unknown - 
His Name- remain - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written in 1862. That reproduced 
above (H 346) is a fair copy addressed "Sue." and signed "Emily." It is 
a redaction of the semi-finished copy in packet 21 (H i i3c): 

The One that could repeat the Summer Day - 
Were Greater than Itself - though He- 
Minutest of Mankind - should be - 



[228] 



And He -could reproduce the Sun- 

At Period of Going down- 

The Lingering - and the Stain -I mean- 

When Orient -have been outgrown - 
And Occident - become Unknown - 
His Name - Remain - 

3. should] might - / could - 

ED did not adopt either suggested change in the fair copy, and she altered 
"that" (line i) to "who." 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 149. It derives from the packet copy and 
adopts "might" in line 3. It is without stanza division. Three words are 
altered: 

4. He] who 8. become] becomes 

7. have] has 



308 

I send Two Sunsets - 
Day and I - in competition ran - 
I finished Two - and several Stars - 
While He -was making One- 

His own was ampler -but as I 
Was saying to a friend - 
Mine -is the more convenient 
To Carry in the Hand- 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, both written about 1862. 
That reproduced above (H ii5b) is in packet 21. The copy below (H B 
1 54), signed "Emily - ," was sent to Sue. 

I send two Sunsets - 
Day and I -in competition - ran - 
I finished Two, and several Stars 
While He -was making One- 
His Own is ampler -but as I 
Was saying to a friend- 
Mine -is the more convenient 
To carry in the Hand- 



The texts are identical except for one word: 

5. was] is 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 60. The text, arranged as two quatrains, 
derives from the copy to Sue. The last three words of line 5 begin line 6. 



309 

For largest Woman's Heart I knew- 
'Tis little I can do - 
And yet the largest Woman's Heart 
Could hold an Arrow -too - 
And so, instructed by my own, 
I tenderer, turn Me to. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The copy 
reproduced above (H B 28) is addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily-." It 
is a variant (in line 4) of the copy in packet 25 (H i39b): 

For Largest Woman's Heart I knew - 

Tis little I can do- 

And yet the Largest Woman's Heart 

Can hold an Arrow, too, 

And so, instructed by my own- 

I tenderer turn me to- 

PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 263. It follows the text of the copy to Sue. 
One word is altered: 

i. knew] know 



3 IO 

Give little Anguish - 

Lives will fret- 

Give Avalanches - 

And they'll slant - 

Straighten - look cautious for their Breath - 

But make no syllable - like Death - [no stanza break] 

[230] 



Who only shows his Marble Disc- 
Sublimer sort - than Speech - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The copy 
reproduced above (H 256) is headed "Sue-" and signed "Emily-/' A 
semifinal draft is in packet 26 (H 4pb) : 

Give little Anguish, 
Lives will fret- 
Give Avalanches, 
And they'll slant, 

Straighten - look cautious for their breath - 
But make no syllable, like Death - 
Who only shows his Granite face- 
Sublimer thing - than Speech - 

8. thing] Way- 

Presumably the variant fair copy to Sue derived from or was written 
after the packet copy had been set down. It is worth noting, as typical 
of ED's method of composition, that the words selected for the two final 
lines in the fair copy are not even suggested as alternate readings in the 
packet copy. 

PUBLICATION: CP (1924), 313. It follows the copy to Sue, with some 
alteration of line spacings. 



3 11 

It sifts from Leaden Sieves- 
It powders all the Wood. 
It fills with Alabaster Wool 
The Wrinkles of the Road- 

It makes an Even Face 
Of Mountain, and of Plain - 
Unbroken Forehead from the East 
Unto the East again - 

It reaches to the Fence - 

It wraps it Rail by Rail [no stanza break] 



Till it is lost in Fleeces - 
It deals Celestial Vail 

To Stump, and Stack -and Stem- 
A Summer's empty Room - 
Acres of Joints, where Harvests were, 
Recordless, but for them- 

It Ruffles Wrists of Posts 

As Ankles of a Queen - 

Then stills it's Artisans - like Ghosts - 

Denying they have been - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are four. The copy reproduced above (H 278), 
signed "Emily " and presumably sent to Sue, was written during 1862. 
It is a redaction of the copy in packet 29 (H 1553) from which it derives, 
written earlier in the same year: 

It sifts from Leaden Sieves - 
It powders all the Field - 
It fills with Alahaster Wool 
The Wrinkles of the Road - 

It makes an even face 
Of Mountain - and of Plain 
Unbroken Forehead from the East 
Unto the East- again - 

It reaches to the Fence 
It wraps it, Rail by Rail, 
Till it is lost in Fleeces 
It flings a Crystal Vail 

On Stump - and Stack - and Stem - 
The Summers empty Room- 
Acres of Joints -where Harvests were- 
Recordless - but for them- 

It Ruffles Wrists of Posts - 

As Ancles of a Queen - 

Then stills it's Artisans - like Swans - 

Denying they have been- 

12] [It] deals celestial Vail - 19. Artisans] Myrmidons 

15. Acres of Joints] Acres of Seams - 19. Swans] Ghosts- 



ED first wrote "of" at the end of line 5, then crossed it out. In the fair 
copy to Sue, ED adopted two of the changes suggested in the packet copy, 
the first and the last. At the same time she introduced three changes not 
previously indicated: 

2. Field] Wood 14. The] A 

13. On] To 

The correction of the spelling "Ancles" (line 18) in the packet copy to 
"Ankles" in the copy to Sue may warrant the conjecture that the latter 
was written after July. In that month ED enclosed a copy of her poem "Of 
Tribulation, these are They" in a letter to Higginson. The word "Ancle" 
appears in the poem, at the bottom of which she wrote: "I spelled Ankle - 
wrong." There is no later instance of "Ancle." 

At a somewhat later date, about 1864, she wrote a variant twelve-line 
version (Bingham 98-46-3). It is in pencil and has been folded as if en- 
closed in an envelope: 

It sifts from Leaden sieves 
It powders all the Wood 
It fills with Alabaster Wool 
The wrinkles of the Road. 
It scatters like the Birds 
Condenses like a Flock 
Like Juggler's Flowers situates 
Upon a Baseless Arc- 
It traverses - yet halts - 
Disperses, while it stays 
Then curls itself in Capricorn 
Denying that it was 

The text of the first four lines is identical with that of the copy to Sue; 
the remaining eight constitute an entirely new version. Many years later, 
in mid-March 1883, she enclosed a copy of this version in a letter (Bingham 
106-32) written to Thomas Niles, editor of the publishing house of 
, Roberts Brothers. In the letter she titles it "Snow." 

It sifts from Leaden Sieves - 
It powders all the Wood - 
It fills with Alabaster Wool 
The Wrinkles of the Road - 

It scatters like the Birds - 

Condenses like a Flock - [no stanza break] 

[33l 



Like Juggler's Figures situates 
Upon a baseless Arc - 

It traverses yet halts - 
Disperses as it stays- 
Then curls itself in Capricorn, 
Denying that it was- 

This copy to Niles differs in two places from the 1864 pencil copy: 
7. Flowers] Figures 10. while] as 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 174-175, tided "The Snow/ 1 It derives 
from the packet copy, adopting the suggested changes "seams" and 
"ghosts." The editors had access to the variant copies and from them 
adopted "wood" (line 2). The variant version is in BM (1945), 41. It is 
a composite of both, adopting "Figures" from the copy to Niles, and 
"while" from the pencil copy. 



312 

Her- "last Poems" - 

Poets -ended - 

Silver -perished -with her Tongue - 

Not on Record -bubbled other, 

Flute -or Woman - 

So divine - 

Not unto it's Summer -Morning 

Robin -uttered Half the Tune- 

Gushed too free for the Adoring - 

From the Anglo-Florentine - 

Late -the Praise- 

'Tis dull - conferring 

On the Head too High to Crown - 

Diadem -or Ducal Showing - 

Be it's Grave -sufficient sign- 

Nought - that We - No Poet's Kinsman - 

Suffocate - with easy wo- 

What, and if, Ourself a Bridegroom- 

Put Her down -in Italy? 

[234] 



MANUSCRIPTS: Three holograph copies of this poem are known to 
have been made, all in the handwriting of 1862. Two have been located; 
the third has not been traced. The fair copy reproduced above (Bingham 
109-7), signed "Emily -," has been folded as if enclosed in an envelope. 
The second fair copy, also signed "Emily- ," was sent to Sue. It was extant 
in 1935 when Mrs. Bianchi made a photostatic reproduction of it before 
she offered it for sale. The text here derives from the photostat, now at 
Harvard: 

Her -"last Poems" - 

Poets ended - 

Silver perished with her Tongue - 

Not on Record bubbled Other - 

Flute, or Woman, so divine - 

Not unto it's Summer - Morning 

Robin - uttered - half - the tune - 

Gushed too free for the adoring, 

From the Anglo-Florentine - 

Late -the Praise - 

'Tis dull - conferring 

On a Head too high to crown - 

Diadem -or Ducal Showing 

Be it's Grave - sufficient Sign- 

Yet, if We -No Poet's Kinsman - 

Suffocate - with easy Wo- 

What and if Ourself a Bridegroom - 

Put Her down -in Italy? 

Though the fair copies show variant readings in lines ii^and 14, they 
are both redactions of the semifinal draft in packet 84 (Bingham 25a): 

Her -last Poems - 

Poets ended - 

Silver - perished - with her Tongue - 

Not on Record - bubbled Other - 

Flute - or Woman - so divine - 

Not unto it's Summer Morning - 
Robin - uttered half the Tune 
Gushed too full for the adoring - 
From the Anglo-Florentine - 

Late -the Praise -'Tis dull - Conferring 
On the Head too High - to Crown - 
Diadem -or Ducal symbol - 
Be it's Grave - sufficient Sign- 



Nought -that We -No Poet's Kinsman - 
Suffocate - with easy Wo- 
What-and if Ourself a Bridegroom - 
Put Her down - in Italy? 

6. unto] upon 12. symbol] showing-/ Token - 

7. uttered] published / lavished 

In the fair copies ED adopted only the suggested change for line 12. 
Reckoning line countings from the packet copy, variants appear thus: 

packet copy first fair copy copy to Sue 

8. full free free 

iz. the the a 

12. symbol showing showing 

14. Nought -that Nought -that Yet, if 

Elizabeth Barrett Browning died 30 June 1861, and her Last Poems 
were posthumously issued in 1862. For two other verse tributes, see 
the poems beginning "I think I was enchanted" and "I went to thank Her." 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 94. The text derives from the copy to Sue. 



I should have been too glad, I see - 

Too lifted -for the scant degree 

Of Life's penurious Round - 

My little Circuit would have shamed 

This new Circumference - have blamed - 

The homelier time behind. 

I should have been too saved - 1 see - 
Too rescued - Fear too dim to me 
That I could spell the Prayer 
I knew so perfect- yesterday - 
That Scalding One - Sabacthini - 
Recited fluent- here - 

Earth would have been too much - 1 see - 

And Heaven - not enough for me - 

I should have had the Joy [no stanza break] 

1*36] 



Without the Fear -to justify - 
The Palm -without the Calvary - 
So Savior -Crucify- 

Defeat whets Victory -they say- 
The Reefs in Old Gethsemane 
Endear the Shore beyond - 
'Tis Beggars - Banquets best define - 
Tis Thirsting -vitalizes Wine- 
Faith bleats to understand - 

21. Shore] Coast 24. bleats] faints - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The copy 
reproduced above, in packet 9 (H 43a), suggests two changes in the final 
stanza, a copy of which (H 246) is addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily-": 

Defeat -whets Victory -they say- 
The Reefs -in old Gethsemane - 
Endear the Coast - beyond! 
Tis Beggars - Banquets - can define - 
'Tis Parching - vitalizes Wine- 
"Faith" bleats -to understand! 

She adopted "Coast" but rejected "faints." She has made further alterations 
in lines 4 and 5 which are not suggested in the packet copy. One may infer 
that this version of stanza 4 represents its final form. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 46-47, titled "Too Much." The editors 
probably had not seen the copy of the stanza sent to Sue. The text there- 
fore follows the packet copy and adopts "faints" in the last line. The 
spelling "Sabachthani" is regularized. 



3M 

Nature - sometimes sears a Sapling - 
Sometimes - scalps a Tree- 
Her Green People recollect it 
When they do not die- 

Fainter Leaves - to Further Seasons - 

Dumbly testify- [no stanza break] 

[237] 



We -who have the Souls - 
Die of tener - Not so vitally - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. One is in 
packet 19 (H io3b), here reproduced; the other (H 292) was presumably 
sent to Sue and is signed "Emily." The latter is written as a single eight- 
line stanza, with these minor differences: 

3. it] it- 7. Souls-] Souls 

5. Further Seasons - ] further Seasons 8. Not] not 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 245. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. It follows the stanza division of the 
packet copy, but arranges the last two lines thus : 

We who have the souls die oftener, 
Not so vitally. 



315 

He fumbles at your Soul 

As Players at the Keys 

Before they drop full Music on - 

He stuns you by degrees- { ; f- 

Prepares your brittle Nature 

For the Etherial Blow 

By fainter Hammers - further heard - 

Then nearer -Then so slow 

Your Breath has time to straighten - 

Your Brain - to bubble Cool - 

Deals - One - imperial - Thunderbolt - 

That scalps your naked Soul- 

When Winds take Forests in their Paws - 
The Universe -is still - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The copy 
reproduced above (H 262) is addressed "Sue" and signed "Emily/* It is 
a redaction of a semifinal draft in packet 19 (H io8c) : 



He fumbles at your Soul 
As Players at the Keys- 
Before they drop full Music on - 
He stuns you by Degrees - 

Prepares your brittle substance 
For the etherial Blow 
By fainter Hammers - further heard - 
Then nearer -then so- slow - 

Your Breath -has chance to straighten - 
Your Brain -to bubble Cool- 
Deals One imperial Thunderbolt - 
That peels your naked Soul- 

When Winds hold Forests in their Paws- 
The Firmaments - are still - 

5. substance] nature 12. peels] scalps 

9. chance] time 14] The Universe -is still 

In the fair copy ED adopted all the changes suggested in the packet copy, 
and made one more: 

13. hold] take 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 86, titled "The Master." The text derives 
from the packet copy, and adopts the suggested changes for lines 9 and 
12. The final couplet is omitted. One word is altered: 

i. Soul] spirit 



316 

The Wind did'nt come from the Orchard - today - 

Further than that- 

Nor stop to play with the Hay - 

Nor threaten a Hat- 

He's a transitive fellow- very - 

Rely on that- 

If He leave a Bur at the door 
We know He has climbed a Fir- 
But the Fir is Where - Declare - 
Were you ever there? 

[239] 



If He bring Odors of Clovers - 
And that is His business -not Our's- 
Then He has been with the Mowers - 
Whetting away the Hours 
To sweet pauses of Hay - 
His Way -of a June Day- 

If He fling Sand, and Pebble - 

Little Boys Hats -and Stubble - 

With an occasional Steeple - 

And a hoarse "Get out of the way, I say/' 

Who'd be the fool to stay? 

Would you - Say - 

Would you be the fool to stay? 

4. threaten] joggle - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two copies. That reproduced above is in 
packet 31 (H i69b) written late in 1862 or early 1863. It is clearly later 
than the copy (H 357) addressed "Sue." and signed "Emily.", written in 
the spring or summer of 1862, which shows several readings that ED 
altered in the later copy: 

The Wind did'nt come from the Orchard - today! 

Farther than that! 

Nor stop to play with the Hay - 

Nor ogle a Hat 

He's a transitive fellow -very- 

Rely on thatl 

When he leave a Burr at the door- 
We say he has Climbed a Fir! 
But -the Fir is where -^ 
Declare] Were you ever there? 

If he bring Odors of Clovers - 

And that is his business -not our's- 

Then he has been with the Mowers - 

Whetting away the Hours 

To sweet pauses of Hay - 

A way he has 

Of a June day! 



[240] 



If he fling Dust -and pebble - 

Little Boy's Hats - and stubble - 

With an occasional steeple - 

And a hoarse 'Get out of the way - 1 say' - 

Who'd be the fool to stay'? 

Would youl Sayl Would you be the fool - to stay? 

A note in Sue's hand on her copy says "Printed 1860," but no printed 
text before that in FF is known. 

PUBLICATION: FF (1932), 248-249. The text follows that of the packet 
copy. The suggested change is rejected. Two lines are altered: 

i. did'nt] did not 13. Then (otratted) 
There is considerable alteration of line arrangement. 



Just so - Jesus - raps - 

He - does'nt weary - 

Last -at the Knocker - 

And first -at the Bell. 

Then -on divinest tiptoe - standing - 

Might He but spy the lady's soul - 

When He- retires - 

Chilled -or weary - 

It will be ample time for-me- 

Patient-upon the steps -until then- 

Heart! I am knocking - low at thee. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two. That reproduced abov 282) ad- 

dressed "Sue," was written about 1862. It is a variant version of the copy 
in packet 8 (H 36b), written somewhat earlier, about 1861: 

Just so - Christ - raps - 

He -does'nt weary - 

First at the Knocker - 

And then -at the Bell- 

Then-on Divinest Tiptoe standing - 

Might he but spy the hiding soul? 

[241] 



When he- retires - 

Chilled -or weary - 

It will be ample time for me - 

Patient -upon the steps -until then- 

Heart-I am knocking low 

At thee! 

10. steps] mat 

Although ED has underlined "mat" as though she had intended it for 
adoption, she rejected it in the copy to Sue. She made alterations in 
lines i, 3, 4, and 6. 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 142. The text is arranged as a single eight- 
line stanza. It follows the copy to Sue except that the italics are not 
retained and "hiding" (line 6) is adopted from the packet copy. Three 
words are altered: 

2. does'nt] does not 8. or] and 

6. but spy] out-spy 



318 

I'll tell you how the Sun rose- 

A Ribbon at a time - 

The Steeples swam in Amethys 

The news, like Squirrels, ran - 

The Hills untied their Bonnets - 

The Bobolinks - begun - 

Then I said softly to myself - 

"That must have been the Sun"! 

But how he set -I know not- 

There seemed a purple stile 

That little Yellow boys and girls 

Were climbing all the while - 

Till when they reached the other side, 

A Dominie in Gray- 

Put gently up the evening Bars- 

And led the flock away- 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies. That reproduced above 
(BPL Higg 5) was one of the four poems ED enclosed in her first letter 



(BPL Higg 50) to T. W. Higginson, posted on 15 April 1862. The other 
copy, written about 1860, is in packet 37 (H 202a). 

I'll tell you how the Sun rose- 
A Ribbon at a time! 
The Steeples swam in Amethyst! 
The news like squirrels ran! 

The hills untied their Bonnets! 
The Bobolinks begun! 
Then I said softly to myself 
"That must have been the Sun"! 



But how he set, I know not! 
There seemed a purple stile 
Which little yellow boys and girls 
Were climbing all the while - 

Till when they reached the other side- 
A Dominie in gray 
Put gently up the evening bars 
And led the flock away! 

Ed drew a horizontal line between the second and third stanzas. The texts 
are identical except for one word: 

II. Which] That 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 94, titled "A Day." The text derives 
from the packet copy. The horizontal line is represented by a series of 
dots; the italics are not retained. 



3^9 

The nearest Dream recedes -unrealized - 

The Heaven we chase, 

Like the June Bee - before the School Boy, 

Invites the Race - 

Stoops -to an easy Clover - 

Dips - evades - teases - deploys - 

Then - to the Royal Clouds 

Lifts his light Pinnace- [no stanza break] 



Heedless of the Boy- 
Staring - bewildered - at the mocking sky- 

Homesick for steadfast Honey - 

Ah, the Bee flies not 

That brews that rare variety! 

MANUSCRIPTS: The text above is reproduced from the copy that ED 
enclosed with three other poems in her first letter to T. W. Higginson, 
mailed 15 April 1862. It is a fair copy redacted from the semifinal draft 
in packet 14 (H 693), written sometime in 1861 : 

The maddest dream - recedes -unrealized - 
The Heaven we chase - 
Like the June Bee -before the Schoolboy - 
Invites the Race- 

Stoops to an Easy Clover - 

Dips - Evades - 

Teazes - deploys - 

Then -to the Royal Clouds - 

Spreads his light pinnace - 
Heedless of the Boy - 
Staring - defrauded - at the 
Mocking sky- 

Homesick for steadfast Honey - 

Ah, the Bee 

Flies not -that brews 

That rare variety! 

i. maddest] nearest n. defrauded] bewildered 

9. Spreads] Lifts 

ED adopted all suggested changes in the copy to Higginson. 

PUBLICATION: The poem was first published in Atlantic Monthly, 
LXVIII (October 1891), 445, in an article which Higginson wrote dealing 
with the letters and poems he had received from ED, and it there repro- 
duces his copy. The same text was used when the poem was collected 
later that year in Poems (1891), 24. In both printings line 3 is divided as 
two lines. 



[244] 



320 

We play at Paste - 
Till qualified, for Pearl - 
Then, drop the Paste - 
And deem ourself a fool- 

The Shapes - though - were similar - 
And our new Hands 
Learned Gem-Tactics - 
Practicing Sands - 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above (Jones Library) was one 
of four poems which ED enclosed in her first letter to T. W. Higginson, 
postmarked, 15 April 1862. A second fair copy in pencil (Bingham 98-3- 
33), headed "Emily." and signed "Emily.", is identical in text: 

We play at Paste - 
Till qualified for Pearl - 
Then, drop the Paste - 
And deem Ourself a fool - 
The Shapes, tho', were similar, 
And our new Hands 
Learned Gem Tactics 
Practicing Sands - 

It is in the handwriting of 1 864, and may have been sent to Emily Fowler 
Ford. 

PUBLICATION: The poem was first published in Atlantic Monthly, 
LXVIII (October 1891), 445, in an article which Higginson wrote dealing 
with the letters and poems he had received from ED. The same text was 
followed when the poem was first collected later in the year in Poems 
(1891), 25, where it is printed without stanza division. The italics are not 
retained. 



321 

Of all the Sounds despatched abroad, 

There's not a Charge to me 

Like that old measure in the Boughs-^ / 

That phrasefess Melody- [n6 stanza break} 



The Wind does -working like a Hand, 
Whose fingers Comb the Sky - 
Then quiver down - with tufts of Tune - 
Permitted Gods, and me - 

Inheritance, it is, to us - 

Beyond the Art to Earn - 

Beyond the trait to take away 

By Robber, since the Gain 

Is gotten not of fingers - 

And inner than the Bone- 

Hid golden, for the whole of Days, 

And even in the Urn, 

I cannot vouch the merry Dust 

Do not arise and play 

In some odd fashion of it's own, 

Some quainter Holiday, 

When Winds go round and round in Bands - 

And thrum upon the door, 

And Birds take places, overhead, 

To bear them Orchestra. 

I crave Him grace of Summer Boughs, 

If such an Outcast be - 

Who never heard that fleshless Chant - 

Rise -solemn -on the Tree, 

As if some Caravan of Sound 

Off Deserts, in the Sky, 

Had parted Rank, 

Then knit, and swept - 

In Seamless Company - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are three. The copy to T. W. Higginson (BPL 
Higg 8), reproduced above, was enclosed in the second letter ED wrote 
him (BPL Higg 51), postmarked 25 April 1862. A second fair copy (H 
301), signed "Emily - ," was sent to Sue about the same time: 

Of all the Sounds despatched abroad 

There's not a Charge to me [no stanza break] 

[246] 



Like that old measure in the Boughs - 

That Phraseless Melody - 

The Wind does - working like a Hand- 

Whose fingers Comb the Sky- 

Then quiver down, with tufts of tune- 

Permitted Gods -and me- 

Inheritance it is to Us 

Beyond the Art to Earn- 

Beyond the trait to take away 

By Robber -since the Gain 

Is gotten not of fingers - 

And inner than the Bone 

Hid golden, for the Whole of days- 

And even in the Urn - 

I cannot vouch the merry Dust 

Do not arise and play, 

In some odd Pattern of it's own - 

Some quainter Holiday - 

When Winds go round and round in Bands - 

And thrum upon the Door- 

And Birds take places - overhead - 

To bear them Orchestra - 

I crave Him Grace of Summer Boughs - 

If such an Outcast be- 

Who never heard that Fleshless Chant - 

Rise solemn on the Tree- 

As if some Caravan of Sound - 

Off Deserts in the Sky- 

Had parted Rank- 

Then knit and swept 

In Seamless Company - 

It is identical in text with the copy to Higginson, except for one word: 

19. fashion] Pattern 

The copy in packet 14 (H yya) from which the fair copies derive is a 
semifinal draft, written at the same time: 

Of all the Sounds despatched abroad - 

There's not a Charge to me 

Like that old measure in the Boughs 

That phraseless Melody - 

The Wind does -working like a Hand 

Whose fingers brush the sky - [no stanza break] 



Then quiver down -with Tufts of Tune- 
Permitted Men -and Me- 

Inheritance it is - to Us - 

Beyond the Art to Earn- 

Beyond the trait to take away- 

By Robber -Since the Gain 

Is gotten, not with fingers, 

And inner than the Bone- 

Hid golden -for the whole of Days- 

And even in the Urn- 

I cannot vouch the merry Dust 

Do not arise and play- 

In some odd fashion of it's own - 

Some quainter Holiday. 

When Winds go round and round, in Bands - 
And thrum upon the Door- 
And Birds take places - Overhead - 
To bear them Orchestra - 

I crave him grace - of Summer Boughs - 

If such an Outcast be- 

He never heard that fleshless Chant 

Rise solemn, in the Tree- 

As if some Caravan of Sound 

On Deserts, in the Sky 

Had broken Rank- 

Then knit - and passed - 

In Seamless Company - 

6. brush] comb 32. passed] swept 

8. Men] Gods 

All three suggested changes are underlined and are adopted in the fair 
copies. The fair copies both show the following variants : 

13. with] of 30. On] Off 

27. He] Who 31. broken] parted 

28. in] on 

PUBLICATION: This is one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393, titled "The Wind." It is here printed 



[248] 



in part only. The text, which is a composite of the copy to Higginson and 
the packet copy, is arranged as two eight-line stanzas. It omits lines 9-24. 
From the packet copy it adopts only the suggested change for line 8, and 
selects the following words which have variants in his copy: 

28. in 31. broken 

30. On 

From his copy it selects one variant: 

27. Who 

It alters one word: 

5. does] makes 

The packet copy furnished the text for Poems (1890), 96-97, titled "The 
Wind/' The text is arranged as a series of four quatrains with a concluding 
five-line stanza. It omits lines 9-2.0, and adopts only the suggested change 
for line 8. No words are altered. Its next printing in CP (1924) reproduces 
the text of Poems (1890). A major change occurs in the Centenary edition 
(1930) and subsequent collections. Here the copy to Sue furnishes the 
text, with wording exactly rendered. The twelve lines missing in the 
previous collections are incorporated as stanzas 3, 4, and 5, with this note 
(page 105): 

This poem, published on page 1 22 of the Complete Poems, appears 
now with the three missing stanzas restored as in the original manu- 
script sent to Susan Gilbert Dickinson, and also as written to 
Colonel Higginson. 



There came a Day at Summer's full, 
Entirely for me- 

I thought that such were for the Saints, 
Where Resurrections - be - 

The Sun, as common, went abroad, 
The flowers, accustomed, blew, 
As if no soul the solstice passed 
That maketh all things new- 

[249] 



The time was scarce profaned, by speech - 

The symbol of a word 

Was needless, as at Sacrament, 

The Wardrobe -of our Lord- 

Each was to each The Sealed Church, 
Permitted to commune this- time - 
Lest we too awkward show 
At Supper of the Lamb. 

The Hours slid fast -as Hours will, 
Clutched tight, by greedy hands - 
So faces on two Decks, look back, 
Bound to opposing lands - 

And so when all the time had leaked, 
Without external sound 
Each bound the Other's Crucifix - 
We gave no other Bond - 

Sufficient troth, that we shall rise- 
Deposed-at length, the Grave - 
To that new Marriage, 
Justified -through Calvaries of Love- 

MANUSCRIPTS: The fair copy reproduced above (BPL Higg 7) was 
enclosed with two other poems in the second letter that ED wrote to 
T. W. Higginson (BPL Higg 51), postmarked 25 April 1862. The 
semifinal copy in packet 23 (H 1283) was written late in 1861: 

There came a Day -at Summer's full- 
Entirely for me- 

I thought that such -were for the Saints - 
Where Resurrections - be - 

The Sun -as Common -went abroad 
The Flowers - accustomed - blew - 
While our two Souls that Solstice passed - 
Which maketh all things new. 



The time was scarce profaned -by speech - 

The foiling of a word 

Was needless - as at Sacrament - 

The wardrobe -of Our Lord- 

Each was to each -the sealed church - 
Permitted to commune -this time- 
Lest we too awkward - show - 
At "Supper of the Lamb." 

The hours slid fast -as hours will- 
Clutched tight -by greedy hands - 
So -faces on two Decks -look back- 
Bound to opposing Lands - 

And so -when all the time had leaked -. 
Without external sound - 
Each -bound the other's Crucifix- 
We gave no other bond - 

Sufficient troth -that we shall rise- 
Deposed - at length - the Grave - 
To that New Marriage - 
Justified - through Calvaries of Love! 

4. Resurrections] Revelations 8. Whiefe] That 

7. While our two Souls that] As if no 10. &Umg] 4*g*e/ symbol 

Soul the 21. 4eeke4] failed 

All deletions and suggested changes are in ink and entered at the time 
the poem was set down except "Revelations," which is in pencil in the 
handwriting of about 1878. 

A second fair copy, now lost, is reproduced in facsimile on two pages 
preceding the title page of Poems (1891). The handwriting is so nearly 
identical with that of the copy to Higginson that one concludes it was 
almost certainly written during the spring of 1862: 

There came a day -at Summer's full- 
Entirely for me- 

I thought that such were for the Saints - 
Where Resurrections - be - 

The Sun - as common - went abroad - 
The Flowers - accustomed - blew - 
As if no soul - that solstice passed - 
Which maketh all things -new- 



The time was scarce profaned -by speech - 

The falling of a word 

Was needless -as at Sacrament - 

The Wardrobe -of Our Lord! 

Each was to each - the sealed Church - 
Permitted to commune -this time- 
Lest we too awkward show- 
At supper of "the Lamb." 

The hours slid fast -as hours will- 
Clutched tight -by greedy hands - 
So -faces on two Decks look back- 
Bound to opposing - lands. 

And so when all the rime had leaked - 
Without external sound - 
Each bound the other's Crucifix - 
We gave no other Bond- 

Sufficient Troth -that we shall rise- 
Deposed -at length the Grave - 
To that new - Marriage - 
Justified - through Calvaries -of love! 

There are three textual differences in the two fair copies: 

7. the] that 10. symbol] falling 

8. That] Which 

In each case ED has used in the fair copy above the original reading of 
the packet copy, even though those readings had been presumably canceled. 
One surmises it was made prior to the cancellations. The evidence for 
believing that the packet copy may have been set down early in January 
is derived from an unpublished letter (now owned by Miss Julia S. E. 
Dwight) written to the Reverend Edward S. D wight, her former pastor. 
The letter can be dated early January 1862, and in it ED has adapted the 
final stanza to honor the memory of Mrs. Dwight who had died the pre- 
ceding September: 

Sufficient troth -that she will rise- 
Deposed-at last -the Grave - 
To that new fondness - Justified - 
by Calvaries of love- 



[252] 



PUBLICATION: The poem was first published, with stanza four omitted, 
in Scribner's Magazine, VIII (August 1890), 240, titled "Renunciation." 
It derives from a copy supplied by Sue. Lavinia possessed the packet copy 
and protested its publication by Sue, though Sue mistakenly believed she 
had the right to publish such poems in her possession as Emily had sent 
her. It seems almost certain, therefore, that the text published in Scribner's 
derived from a copy, now lost, which had been sent to Sue. Textually it 
differs from the copy to Higginson in four places: 

3. were] was 17. fast] past 

7. soul] sail 25. shall] should 

Though the three holographs discussed above show variant readings, they 
do so by way of selection from among the suggested changes in the packet 
copy. All four of the altered readings in Scribners are unique in that one 
printing. The poem, by permission of E. L. Burlingame, the Scribner's 
editor, was included among Poems (1890), 58-59, tided "Renunciation," 
when the volume was issued in November (see AB, 59). The missing 
stanza was restored. The text derives from the packet copy, with all the 
suggested changes adopted. When the poem next appeared in CP (1924), 
152-153, it reproduced the same text with one exception: "soul" reverted 
to "sail" as it had been printed in Scribners. Mrs. Bianchi, who prepared 
that edition and the subsequent ones, in which that reading obtains, had 
the packet copy for her use. It is true that in that copy the word "soul" 
bears a superficial resemblance to "sail." 



3*3 

As if I asked a common Alms, 

And in my wondering hand 

A Stranger pressed a Kingdom, 

And I, bewildered, stand - 

As if I asked the Orient 

Had it for me a Morn - 

And it should lift it's purple Dikes, 

And shatter me with Dawn! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are three. The copy reproduced above is incor- 
porated in a letter written to T. W. Higginson (BPL Higg 52), post- 

[253] 



marked 7 June 1862. The text is identical, except for a variant last line, 
with the copy in packet 82 (Bingham i3c), written about 1858: 

As if I asked a common alms - 
And in my wondering hand, 
A stranger pressed a kingdom - 
And I - bewildered stand - 
As if I asked the Orient 
Had it for me a Morn? 
And it sh'd lift it's purple dikes 
And flood me with the Dawn! 

A third copy (Bingham), written about 1884, is in a letter to an un- 
identified recipient. The text, identical with that in the copy to Higginson, 
is arranged as prose: 

As if I asked a Common Alms and in my wondering Hand A stranger 
pressed a Kingdom, and I bewildered stand. As if I asked the Orient had it for 
me a Morn, And it should lift it's Purple Dikes, and shatter me with Dawn - 



PUBLICATION: The letter to Higginson was first published in Atlantic 
Monthly, LXVIII (October 1891), 447, in an article which Higginson 
wrote dealing with the letters and poems he had received from ED. 
Although Mrs. Todd had the packet copy version, she never included it 
in any of the poetry collections. The letter to Higginson is also in Letters 
(ed. 1894), 34; (ed- I93 1 ), 2 75; also LL (1924), 241. 



Some keep the Sabbath going to Church - 
I keep it, staying at Home- 
With a Bobolink for a Chorister - 
And an Orchard, for a Dome - 

Some keep the Sabbath in Surplice - 
I just wear my Wings - 

[no stanza break] 



[>54l 



And instead of tolling the Bell, for Church, 
Our little Sexton -sings. 

God preaches, a noted Clergyman - 
And the sermon is never long, 
So instead of getting to Heaven, at last- 
Fm going, all along. 

MANUSCRIPTS : Two fair copies are extant, identical in text. Two others, 
now lost, are discussed below. The copy reproduced above (BPL Higg 
10) was enclosed with three other poems in a letter to T. W. Higginson 
(BPL Higg 54), written in July 1862, in which she tells him that she is 
happy to be his "scholar": "If you truly consent, I recite, now-" (Letters, 
ed. 1931, 276). The poem was written not later than 1860, in which year 
it was incorporated in packet 1 5 (H 846) : 

Some -keep the Sabbath - going to church - 
I - keep it - staying at Home - 
With a Bobolink - for a Chorister - 
And an Orchard - for a Dome - 

Some -keep the Sabbath, in Surplice - 
I - just wear my wings. 
And instead of tolling the bell, for church - 
Our little Sexton - sings. 

"God" - preaches - a noted Clergyman - 
And the sermon is never long, 
So - instead of getting to Heaven - at last - 
I'm - going - all along! 

One of the lost copies was sent to Gordon L. Ford. His wife, Emily Fowler 
Ford, a girlhood friend of ED's, is quoted as saying: 

The first poem I ever read was the robin chorister . . . which she 
gave my husband years ago. (Letters, ed. 1931, 132.) 

Presumably the other lost copy was sent to some member of the Sweetser 
family and was the source of the version published in 1 864. 

PUBLICATION: The fifth of seven poems known to have been published 
in ED's lifetime, this poem appeared on 12 March 1864 in The Round 
Table (I, 195), a weekly review and record published in New York by 
ED's cousin by marriage, Henry E. Sweetser, and his cousin, Charles H. 

[255] 



Sweetser. It is unsigned and is tided "My Sabbath." It is possible that ED 
herself supplied the tide, as she frequendy did when she sent poems to 
friends. But whether she sent it with the intent that it should be published, 
or whether it appeared without her knowledge, is not known. In this 
text one word differs: 

ii. getting] going 

It probably is a variant reading; it could be an editorial alteration. It was 
first collected in Poems (1890), 74, tided "A Service of Song/' where it 
follows the text of the packet copy. 



3*5 

Of Tribulation - these are They, 
Denoted by the White. 
The Spangled Gowns, a lesser Rank 
Of Victors, designate - 

All these - did conquer - 
But the Ones who overcame most times - 
Wear nothing commoner than Snow- 
No Ornament -but Palms - 

"Surrender" is a sort unknown 
On this Superior soil- 
"Defeat", an Outgrown Anguish, 
Remembered - as the Mile 

Our panting Ancle barely passed, 
When Night devoured the Road - 
But we -stood -whispering in the House - 
And all we said -was 

SAVED! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two drafts of thisjparaphrase of Revelations 7 
The fair copy reproduced above (BPL Higg 15) was enclosed wlttrfhret 
other poems in a letter (BPL Higg 54) to T. W. Higginson, written in 
July 1862. The last word is spelled out in large letters, and below it at 



the bottom of the sheet ED has written: "I spelled Ankle - wrong." The 
text is identical with that of the semifinal draft in packet 28 (H i29b), 
written late in 1861: 

Of Tribulation, these are They, 
Denoted by the White - 
The Spangled Gowns, a lesser Rank 
Of Victors - designate - 

All these -did Conquer - 
But the ones who overcame most times - 
Wear nothing commoner than snow- 
No Ornament, but Palms - 

Surrender -is a sort unknown - 
On this superior soil- 
Defeat - an outgrown Anguish - 
Remembered, as the Mile 

Our panting Ancle barely passed - 
When Night devoured the Road- 
But we - stood whispering in the House - 
And all we said - was "Saved"! 

13. passed] gained 

The suggested change is not adopted in the fair copy. 

PUBLICATION: The poem was first published in Atlantic Monthly, 
LXVIII (October 1891), 448, in an article which Higginson wrote dealing 
with the letters and poems he had received from ED. It there reproduces 
the copy to him, and bears the title "The Saint's Rest," which he supplied. 
He reproduces the misspelling, "ancle," and adds a note : 

[ Note by the writer of the verses. ] I spelled ankle wrong. 

It was first collected later in the year in Poems (1891), 227, titled "Saved!" 
The text derives from the packet copy, and the suggested change (which 
ED rejected in her copy to Higginson) is adopted. In both printings the 
first three words of line 6 conclude line 5. In the collected edition the note 
is omitted and the spelling of ankle corrected. In Atlantic Monthly, but 
not in Poems, one word is altered: 

8. Ornament] ornaments 



[257] 



326 

I cannot dance upon my Toes - 
No Man instructed me- 
But oftentimes, among my mind, 
A Glee possesseth me, 

That had I Ballet knowledge - 
Would put itself abroad 
In Pirouette to blanch a Troupe - 
Or lay a Prima, mad, 

And though I had no Gown of Gauze - 
No Ringlet, to my Hair, 
Nor hopped for Audiences -like Birds, 
One Claw upon the Air, 

Nor tossed my shape in Eider Balls, 
Nor rolled on wheels of snow 
Till I was out of sight, in sound, 
The House encore me so- 

Nor any know I know the Art 
I mention - easy - Here - 
Nor any Placard boast me - 
It's full as Opera - 

MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above is in packet 14 (H 73c), 
written during 1862. The copy below (H Higg 4) was one of two poems 
enclosed in a letter (BPL Higg 55) written to T. W. Higginson in August 
1862. One word is variant: 

ii. for] to 

I cannot dance upon my Toes- 

No Man instructed me - 

But oftentimes, among my mind 

A Glee possesseth me 

That had I Ballet - Knowledge - 

Would put itself abroad 

In Pirouette to blanch a Troupe- 

Or lay a Prima -mad- 

[258] 



And though I had no Gown of Gauze - 

No Ringlet, to my Hair- 

Nor hopped to Audiences - like Birds - 

One Claw upon the Air- 

Nor tossed my shape in Eider Balls - 

Nor rolled on Wheels of Snow 

Till I was out of sight in sound - 

The House encore me so- 

Nor any know I know the Art 
I mention easy -Here- 
Nor any Placard boast me 
It's full as Opera - 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 8. The text, which derives from the packet 
copy, is arranged without stanza division. One word is altered: 

17. know I know] knew I know 



3*7 

Before I got my eye put out 

I liked as well to see- 

As other Creatures, that have Eyes 

And know no other way- 

But were it told to me- Today - 
That I might have the sky 
For mine - 1 tell you that my Heart 
Would split, for size of me- 

The Meadows - mine - 

The Mountains - mine - 

All Forests -Stintless Stars - 

As much of Noon as I could take 

Between my finite eyes- 

The Motions of The Dipping Birds - 
The Morning's Amber Road- 
For mine -to look at when I liked - 
The News would strike me dead - 

[259] 



So safer Guess -with just my soul 
Upon the Window pane- 
Where other Creatures put their eyes- 
Incautious - of the Sun - 

MANUSCRIPTS: The fair copy reproduced above (H Am 58) was one 
of the two poems enclosed in a letter (BPL Higg 55) to T. W. Higginson, 
written in August 1862. The semifinal draft (H 1713), in packet 32, was 
written at the same time: 

Before I got my eye put out - 
I liked as well to see 
As other creatures, that have eyes - 
And know no other way - 

But were it told to me, Today, 
That I might have the Sky 
For mine, I tell you that my Heart 
Would split, for size of me - 

The Meadows - mine - 

The Mountains - mine - 

All Forests - Stintless Stars - 

As much of noon, as I could take - 

Between my finite eyes - 

The Motions of the Dipping Birds - 
The Lightning's jointed Road - 
For mine - to look at when I liked - 
The news would strike me dead - 

So safer - guess - with just my soul 
Upon the window pane 
Where other creatures put their eyes - 
Incautious - of the Sun - 

15. Lightning's jointed Road] Morning's Amber Road- 

The suggested change is adopted in the fair copy; otherwise the texts are 
identical. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 60-6 1, titled "Sight." The text, arranged 
as five quatrains, derives from the packet copy; the suggested change is 
rejected. 



[260] 



3*8 

A Bird came down the Walk- 
He did not know I saw - 
He bit an Angleworm in halves 
And ate the fellow, raw, 

And then he drank a Dew 

From a convenient Grass - 

And then hopped sidewise to the Wall 

To let a Beetle pass - 

He glanced with rapid eyes 

That hurried all around - 

They looked like frightened Beads, I thought - 

He stirred his Velvet Head 

Like one in danger, Cautious, 
I offered him a Crumb 
And he unrolled his feathers 
And rowed him softer home- 

Than Oars divide the Ocean, 
Too silver for a seam- 
Or Butterflies, off Banks of Noon 
Leap, plashless as they swim. 

MANUSCRIPTS: The fair copy reproduced above (Bingham 98-46-1) 
was written in 1862. It is a redaction of the semifinal draft in packet 85 
(Bingham 32c) made somewhat earlier in the same year, and offers a 
suggested change which ED rejected in the fair copy: 

A Bird, came down the Walk- 
He did not know I saw- 
He bit an Angle Worm in halves 
And ate the fellow, raw, 

And then, he drank a Dew 

From a convenient Grass - 

And then hopped sidewise to the Wall 

To let a Beetle pass- 



He glanced with rapid eyes, 

That hurried all abroad - 

They looked like frightened Beads, I thought, 

He stirred his Velvet Head- 

Like one in danger, Cautious, 
I offered him a Crumb, 
And he unrolled his feathers, 
And rowed him softer Home- 

Than Oars divide the Ocean, 
Too silver for a Seam- 
Or Butterflies, off Banks of Noon, 
Leap, plashless as they swim. 

3. bit] shook - 

ED altered one word in the fair copy: 

10. abroad] around 

The copy of this poem listed by Mrs. Todd (Letters, 443) among those 
which ED enclosed in letters to Higginson has not been located. It is 
listed in Higginson's inventory of poems that ED sent to him which he 
compiled and included in a letter to Mrs. Todd, dated 13 May 1891 CAB, 
129). 

PUBLICATION: The copy to Higginson was the source of the first 
publication of the poem in Atlantic Monthly, LXVIII (October 1891), 
446-447, and is there incorporated in an article which Higginson wrote 
dealing with the letters and poems he had received from ED. It is identical 
with the text of the fair copy above, but there is no reason to suppose that 
it is the same copy, since Mrs. Todd indicates in her reply to Higginson's 
letter of 13 May that she already had a copy of the poem CAB, 130). 
Whether she then had both the fair copy and the packet copy is not clear. 
The poem was first collected in Poems (1891), 140-141, titled "In the 
Garden/' The text derives from the packet copy, and rejects the suggested 
change. In Atlantic Monthly, but not in Poems, one word is altered: 

7. the] a 



[afe] 



So glad we are - a Stranger'd deem 

'Twas sorry, that we were - 

For where the Holiday should be 

There publishes a Tear - 

Nor how Ourselves be justified - 

Since Grief and Joy are done 

So similar- An Optizan 

Could not decide between - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. That repro- 
duced above (Bingham), signed "Emily-/' was sent to Samuel Bowles. 
It is a redaction of the semifinal draft in packet 84 (Bingham 27c). 

So glad we are - a stranger'd deem 
'Twas sorry - that we were - 
For where the Holiday - should be - 
There publishes - a Tear. 

Nor how Ourselves be justified - 
Since Grief and Joy are done 
So similar - an Optizan 
Could not discern between - 

4. publishes] Bustles but 8. discern] conclude - / decide - 

One of the changes suggested for line 8 ("decide") is adopted. "Optizan" is 
evidently a "made word," presumably meaning one skilled in the science of 
optics. 

PUBLICATION: The copy to Bowles is in Letters (ed. 1894), 209; (ed. 
J 98; also LL (1924), 236. 



330 

The Juggler's Hat her Country is - 
The Mountain Gorse - the Bee's! 

MANUSCRIPT: These lines (Bingham), addressed "Mr Bowles-/' were 
sent to Samuel Bowles about 1861. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 211; (ed. 1931), 200; also LL 
(1924), 245. The italics are not retained. 

[263] 



While Asters - 

On the Hill - 

Their Everlasting fashions - set - 

And Covenant Gentians -Frill! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1861 (Bingham). The lines, signed "Emily./' 
are addressed "Mr Bowles." At a somewhat later date, in 1862, ED adapted 
these lines to create the fourth stanza of poem number 342. 

PUBLICATION: Letters (ed. 1894), 209; (ed. 1931), 198; also LL 
(1924), 236. 



There are two Ripenings - one - of sight - 

Whose forces Spheric wind 

Until the Velvet product 

Drop spicy to the ground - 

A homelier maturing - 

A process in the Bur - 

That teeth of Frosts alone disclose 

In far October Air. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The fair copy 
reproduced above (Bingham 98-46-22) is a redaction of the copy in 
packet 26 (H 4yc): 

There are two Ripenings - 

One -of Sight -whose Forces spheric round 

Until the Velvet Product 

Drop, spicy, to the Ground - 

A Homelier - maturing - 

A Process in the Bur- 

Which Teeth of Frosts - alone disclose - 

In still October Air- 

2. round] wind 8. In] on far - 

7. Which Teeth] that Teeth 8. still] far- 

[264] 



The fair copy adopts all but one of the suggested changes. ED sent another 
fair copy, now lost, to Mrs. Kate Scott Turner (later Mrs. John Anthon). 
Katie visited Sue in Amherst several times and the poem may have been 
sent across to her during one of the visits. Katie made a transcript of it 
(H B 126) which shows the text to be identical with that of the fair 
copy above except for one word: 

8. In] On 

PUBLICATION: The copy to Mrs. Turner is in Letters (ed. 1894), M7 
(ed. 1931), 145; also LL (1924), 207. The same text, printed as two five- 
line stanzas with an altered line arrangement, is in FP (1929), 200, and 
in later collections of the poems. All printings follow the text of the 
Turner (Anthon) transcript except Letters (1931), which substitutes "In" 
for "On" (line 8). 

333 

The Grass so little has to do - 
A Sphere of simple Green - 
With only Butterflies to brood 
And Bees to entertain - 

And stir all day to pretty Tunes 
The Breezes fetch along - 
And hold the Sunshine in it's lap 
And bow to everything - 

And thread the Dews, all night, like Pearls - 

And make itself so fine 

A Duchess were too common 

For such a noticing - 

And even when it dies -to pass 
In Odors so divine - 
Like Lowly spices, lain to sleep - 
Or Spikenards, perishing - 

And then, in Sovreign Barns to dwell - 
And dream the Days away, 
The Grass so little has to do 
I wish I were a Hay- 

[265] 



MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written early in 1862. The fair 
copy reproduced above (Bingham 109-10) is addressed "Austin-." It is 
a redaction of the text in packet 14 (H 733): 

The Grass so little has to do, 
A Sphere of simple Green - 
With only Butterflies, to brood, 
And Bees, to entertain - 

And stir all day to pretty tunes 
The Breezes fetch along, 
And hold the Sunshine, in it's lap 
And bow to everything, 

And thread the Dews, all night, like Pearl, 

And make itself so fine 

A Duchess, were too Common 

For such a noticing, 

And even when it die, to pass 
In odors so divine, 
As lowly spices, gone to sleep - 
Or Amulets of Pine- 

And then to dwell in Sovreign Barns, 
And dream the Days away, 
The Grass so little has to do, 
I wish I were a Hay- 

15. gone to sleep] laid asleep / [laid] to sleep- 16. Amulets of Pine] Spikenards 

perishing. 

The suggested change for line 16 is adopted in the copy to Austin, the 
word order in line 17 is altered, and the suggested changes for line 15 
are rejected in favor of another: "lain to sleep/' (ED generally preferred 
the past participle of the verb lay.) She made three further textual altera- 
tions: 

9. Pearl] Pearls 15. As] Like 

13. die] dies 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 78-79, titled "The Grass." The text 
derives from the packet copy to the extent that both suggested changes 
are rejected. It appears to adopt two words from the copy to Austin: 

9. pearls 13. dies 

[266] 



These changes, however, are of the nature that Higginson might inde- 
pendently have made. Although Mrs. Todd ultimately came to have the 
copy to Austin, there is no reason to believe she had it at the time she 
was transcribing the packet copy for the printer. In Poems ( 1 890) the last 
line reads: 

I wish I were the hay! 

Mrs. Bingham quotes her mother in AB, 58, on the reason for this altera- 
tion: 

The quaintness of the [indefinite] article really appealed to me, 
but my trusted collaborator was decided on that line. "It cannot 
go in so," he exclaimed, "everybody would say that hay is a col- 
lective noun requiring the definite article. Nobody can call it a 
hay!" So I retired, feeling that of course he was right with regard 
to the public. But I have always had a sneaking desire to see a 
change back to the original version! 

When Mrs. Bianchi included the poem in CP (1924), the packet copy 
was in her possession. There and in later collections the text is identical 
with that in Poems (1890) except for the last line, which is correctly 
rendered. 



334 

All the letters I can write 
Are not fair as this- 
Syllables of Velvet - 
Sentences of Plush, 
Depths of Ruby, undrained, 
Hid, Lip, for Thee- 
Play it were a Humming Bird- 
And just sipped- me - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written in 1862. The copy repro- 
duced above is in packet 14 (H 73b). A variant is incorporated in a letter 
(Yale) to ED's cousin Eudocia (Converse) Flynt, of Monson. The letter, 
which enclosed a flower, reached Mrs. Flynt according to her diary on 
21 July 1862: 



All the letters I could write, 
Were not fair as this- 
Syllables of Velvet - 
Sentences of Plush - 
Depths of Ruby, undrained- 
Hid, Lip, for Thee, 
Play it were a Humming Bird 
And sipped just Me- 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 80. The text follows that of the packet 
copy. 



335 

'Tis not that Dying hurts us so - 
'Tis Living -hurts us more- 
But Dying -is a different way- 
A Kind behind the Door- 

The Southern Custom -of the Bird- 
That ere the Frosts are due - 
Accepts a better Latitude - 
We-are the Birds -that stay. 

The Shiverers round Farmer's doors - 
For whose reluctant Crumb - 
We stipulate - till pitying Snows 
Persuade our Feathers Home 

MANUSCRIPT: Late 1862, in packet 25 (H i34d). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 201. It derives from a transcript made from 
the packet copy by Mrs. Todd. The word "Bird" (line 5) in the packet 
copy is written "birds" in Mrs. Todd's transcript, and is so rendered in BM. 
A variant of this poem, without stanza division, is incorporated in a letter 
now lost, sent to the Norcross cousins on the occasion of the death of their 
father, Loring Norcross, 7 January 1863. It is published in Letters (ed. 
1894), 251; (ed. 1931), 229; also LL (1924), 253. The variants are in 
three lines: 

i ] It is not dying hurts us so 7. Accepts] Adopts 

6. ere the] soon as 



336 

The face I carry with me - last - 
When I go out of Time 
To take my Rank - by - in the West - 
That face will just be thine - 

I'll hand it to the Angel - 

That Sir - was my Degree - 

In Kingdoms you have heard the Raised - 

Refer to -possibly. 

Hell take it -scan it -step aside - 
Return - with such a crown 
As Gabriel - never capered at - 
And beg me put it on 

And then hell turn me round and round - 
To an admiring sky- 
As one that bore her Master's name - 
Sufficient Royalty! 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 80 (Bingham 5). 
PUBLICATION: EM (1945), 177. 



337 

I know a place where Summer strives 
With such a practised Frost - 
She - each year leads her Daisies back - 
Recording briefly - "Lost" - 

But when the South Wind stirs the Pools 
And struggles in the lanes - 
Her Heart misgives Her, for Her Vow- 
And she pours soft Refrains 

Into the lap of Adamant - 

And spices and the Dew - [no stanza break] 

[269] 



That stiffens quietly to Quartz- 
Upon her Amber Shoe - 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 6 (H 23b). 
PUBLICATION : Poems ( 1 89 1 ) , 148. 

338 

I know that He exists. 
Somewhere -in Silence - 
He has hid his rare life 
From our gross eyes. 

'Tis an instant's play. 
'Tis a fond Ambush - 
Just to make Bliss 
Earn her own surprise 

But -should the play 
Prove piercing earnest - 
Should the glee -glaze - 
In Death's -stiff -stare - 

Would not the fun 
Look too expensive! 
Would not the jest- 
Have crawled too far! 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 6 (H 243). In line 13 ED crossed 
out "Joke" an d substituted "fun." 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 83. When the poem was included in CP 
(1924) and later collections, one word was altered: 

5. an] in 

339 

I tend my flowers for thee - 
Bright Absentee! 
My Fuschzia's Coral Seams 
Rip -while the Sower - dreams - 

[270] 



Geraniums -tint -and spot- 
Low Daisies- dot - 
My Cactus -splits her Beard 
To show her throat - 

Carnations - tip their spice - 

And Bees -pick up- 

A Hyacinth -I hid- 

Puts out a Ruffled Head- 

And odors fall 

From flasks -so small - 

You marvel how they held - 

Globe Roses -break their satin flake - 
Upon my Garden floor - 
Yet-thou-not there - 
I had as lief they bore 
No Crimson - more - 

Thy flower -be gay- 

Her Lord -away! 

It ill becometh me- 

ril dwell in Calyx- Gray - 

How modestly - alway - 

Thy Daisy - 

Draped for thee! 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 6 (H 240 . 

PUBLICATION: London Mercury, XIX (February 1929), 353-354; FP 
(1929), 141. The text is arranged as five stanzas of 4, 4, 7, 8, and 5 lines; 
in later collections, as four stanzas of 4, 4, 7, and 1 3 lines. Two words are 
altered: 

7. her] a 8. her] its 



34 

Is Bliss then, such Abyss, 
I must not put my foot amiss 
For fear I spoil my shoe? 

[271] 



I'd rather suit my foot 
Than save my Boot- 
For yet to buy another Pair 
Is possible, 
At any store - 

But Bliss, is sold just once. 
The Patent lost 
None buy it any more - 
Say, Foot, decide the point - 
The Lady cross, or not? 
Verdict for Boot! 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 6 (H 26b). ED first wrote "at" 
at the end of line 7, then deleted it. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 67. The final three lines are omitted 
and one word is altered: 

8. store] fair 

The complete text, derived from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd, is in 
New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 20, with line 8 corrected. 



34 1 

After great pain, a formal feeling comes - 
The Nerves sit ceremonious, like Tombs - 
The stiff Heart questions was it He, that bore, 
And Yesterday, or Centuries before? 

The Feet, mechanical, go round - 

Of Ground, or Air, or Ought - 

A Wooden way 

Regardless grown, 

A Quartz contentment, like a stone - 

This is the Hour of Lead- 
Remembered, if outlived, 
As Freezing persons, recollect the Snow- 
First- Chill -then Stupor -then the letting go- 

[272] 



MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 6 (H 260). In the second stanza 
ED has placed i, 3, 2, 4, respectively before lines i, 2, 3, and 4, as though 
she intended the stanza to read: 

The Feet, mechanical, go round - 

A Wooden way 

Of Ground, or Air, or Ought - 

Regardless grown, 

A Quartz contentment, like a stone - 

PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIII (February 1929), 184; FP 
(1929), 175. In later collections the text is arranged as three quatrains. 
The second stanza reads: 

The feet mechanical 

Go round a wooden way 

Of ground or air or Ought, regardless grown, 

A quartz contentment like a stone. 



34* 

It will be Summer -eventually. 
Ladies -with parasols - 
Sauntering Gentlemen - with Canes - 
And little Girls -with Dolls - 

Will tint the pallid landscape - 
As 'twere a bright Boquet- 
Tho' drifted deep, in Parian - 
The Village lies- today - 

The Lilacs - bending many a year- 
Will sway with purple load- 
The Bees - will not despise the tune - 
Their Forefathers - have hummed - 

The Wild Rose - redden in the Bog - 
The Aster -on the Hill 
Her everlasting fashion- set - 
And Covenant Gentians -frill- 

[273] 



Till Summer folds her miracle - 
As Women - do - their Gown - 
Or Priests -adjust the Symbols - 
When Sacrament -is done- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 6 (H 3813). The fourth stanza 
has been altered to make poem number 331. 

PUBLICATION: The first attempt to publish this poem was made in 
Poems (1896), 101, where it appeared, titled "Nature's Changes," with 
stanza i omitted, and stanzas 2 and 3 thus altered: 

The springtime's pallid landscape 

Will glow like bright bouquet, 
Though drifted deep in parian 

The village lies to-day. 

The lilacs, bending many a year, 

With purple load will hang; 
The bees will not forget the tune 

Their old forefathers sang. 

The only further change is in line 13, where "Wild Rose" is rendered 
"rose will." The poem was next issued in CP (1924), 126-127, i n the 
text of Poems (1896), but without title. In the first printing of FP (1929), 
195-196, it appeared with stanza i restored and the text of the other 
stanzas corrected, but with the five stanzas of the poem "I'm sorry for the 
Dead -Today" appended to it. An accompanying note reads: "Published 
in the 'Complete Poems' on page 126 with the first stanza omitted; now 
given as originally written." Later printings of FP separated the two poems, 
and in subsequent collections this poem has been correctly rendered. 



343 

My Reward for Being, was This. 
My premium - My Bliss - 
An Admiralty, less- 
A Sceptre- penniless - 
And Realms -just Dross - 

When Thrones accost my Hands - 

With "Me, Miss, Me"- [no stanza break] 

[274] 



I'll unroll Thee- 

Dominions dowerless - beside this Grace - 

Election -Vote- 

The Ballots of Eternity, will show just that. 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two fair copies, both transcribed into packets. 
That reproduced above, in packet 6 (H sSib), was written early in 1862. 
The variant below, in packet 29 (H 7od), was written later in the same 
year: 

My Reward for Being -was This- 
My Premium -My Bliss - 
An Admiralty, less- 
A Sceptre - penniless - 
And Realms - just Dross. 

When Thrones - accost My Hands - 

With "Me - Miss- Me" - 

I'll unroll- Thee - 

Sufficient Dynasty - 

Creation - powerless - 

To Peer this Grace - 

Empire - State - 

Too little- Dust - 

To Dower - so Great - 

PUBLICATION: Both versions are in BM (1945), 308-309, derived 
from transcripts made by Mrs. Todd. They are placed among unfinished 
poems because of an uncertainty, as a note explains, whether the holo- 
graph copies would reveal two versions. 



344 

'Twas the old -road -through pain- 
That unfrequented-one- 
With many a turn -and thorn - 
That stops -at Heaven - 

This -was the Town -she passed - 
There -where she -rested -last- 
Then- stepped more fast- 
The little tracks -close prest- [no stanza 'break'] 



Then - not so swift - 
Slow -slow -as feet did weary- grow- 
Then- stopped -no other track! 

Wait! Look! Her little Book- 

The leaf -at love -turned back- 

Her very Hat- 

And this worn shoe just fits the track - 

Herself- though - fled! 

Another bed -a short one- 
Women make - tonight - 
In Chambers bright - 
Too out of sight -though 
For our hoarse Good Night - 
To touch her Head! 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 6 (H sSic). 

PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIII (March 1929), 331; FP 
(1929), 102. The text is arranged as five stanzas of 5, 5, 4, 6, and 6 lines; 
in later collections, as five stanzas of 4, 4, 4, 6, and 6 lines. Three words 
are altered: 

10. grow] go 22. Head] hand 

14. Her] The 



345 

Funny -to be a Century - 
And see the People -going by- 
I- should die of the Oddity - 
But then-Tin not so staid -as He- 

He keeps His Secrets safely- very - 
Were He to tell - extremely sorry 
This Bashful Globe of Our's would be 
So dainty of Publicity - 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 33 (H 

[276] 



PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 7. The text, arranged as two five-line 
stanzas, in later collections is restored as quatrains. 



34 6 

Not probable -The barest Chance - 
A smile too few - a word too much 
And far from Heaven as the Rest- 
The Soul so close on Paradise - 

What if the Bird from journey far- 

Confused by Sweets -as Mortals - are - 

Forget the secret of His wing 

And perish -but a Bough between - 

Oh, Groping feet- 

Oh Phantom Queen! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 33 (H 1790. 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 93. The last two lines are arranged as one. 
One word is altered: 

i. barest] merest 



347 

When Night is almost done- 
And Sunrise grows so near 
That we can touch the Spaces - 
It's time to smooth the Hair- 

And get the Dimples ready - 
And wonder we could care 
For that old -faded Midnight - 
That frightened -but an Hour- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 33 (H i79d). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 31, tided "Dawn." 

[277] 



348 

I dreaded that first Robin, so, 
But He is mastered, now, 
I'm some accustomed to Him grown, 
He hurts a little, though - 

I thought if I could only live 
Till that first Shout got by- 
Not all Pianos in the Woods 
Had power to mangle me - 

I dared not meet the Daffodils - 
For fear their Yellow Gown 
Would pierce me with a fashion 
So foreign to my own - 

I wished the Grass would hurry - 
So -when 'twas time to see- 
He'd be too tall, the tallest one 
Could stretch -to look at me- 

I could not bear the Bees should come, 
I wished they'd stay away 
In those dim countries where they go, 
What word had they, for me? 

They're here, though; not a creature failed - 
No Blossom stayed away 
In gentle deference to me- 
The Queen of Calvary - 

Each one salutes me, as he goes, 
And I, my childish Plumes, 
Lift, in bereaved acknowledgement 
Of their unthinking Drums - 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 85 (Bingham 28a). On n 
January 1862, the Daily News of Philadelphia reported Charles Wads- 
worth's call to Calvarv Church in San Francisco, where he arrived on 28 



May. The handwriting of this poem somewhat antedates that of ED's 
first letter to T. W. Higginson written on 15 April, where she indicates 
that she is immersing herself in her verse and seeking an outlet by way of 
professional advice. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 128-129, tided "In Shadow." One word 
is altered: 

3. I'm some] And I'm 



349 

I had the Glory - that will do - 

An Honor, Thought can turn her to 

When lesser Fames invite - 

With one long "Nay" - 

Bliss' early shape 

Deforming- Dwindling -Gulphing up- 

Time's possibility. 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 85 (Bingham 290). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 116. Lines 4 and 5 are printed as one line. 



35 

They leave us with the Infinite. 
But He -is not a man- 
His fingers are the size of fists - 
His fists, the size of men- 

And whom he foundeth, with his Arm 
As Himmaleh, shall stand - 
Gibraltar's Everlasting Shoe 
Poised lightly on his Hand, 

So trust him, Comrade - 

You for you, and I, for you and me 

Eternity is ample, 

And quick enough, if true. 

[279] 



MANUSCRIPTS: The copy reproduced above, written early in 1862, is 
in packet 85 (Bingham 29d). A second fair copy (Bingham 98-^-17), 
identical in text and without address or signature, is folded as if enclosed 
in an envelope. It was written somewhat later, probably in 1863: 

They leave us with the Infinite - 

But He is not a man, 

His Fingers are the size of Fists - 

His Fists, the size of Men. 

And whom he foundeth with his Arm 

As Himmaleh, shall stand - 

Gibraltar's everlasting shoe 

Poised lightly on his Hand- 

So trust Him, Comrade! 

You for you, and I 

For you and me - 

Eternity is ample - 

And quick enough, 

If true- 

The texts are identical. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 217-218. The text follows the line and 
stanza arrangement of the packet copy except that the first three words of 
line 10 conclude line 9. 



351 

I felt my life with both my hands 
To see if it was there - 
I held my spirit to the Glass, 
To prove it possibler- 

I turned my Being round and round 

And paused at every pound 

To ask the Owner's name- 

For doubt, that I should know the Sound - 

I judged my features - jarred my hair- 
I pushed my dimples by, and waited - 
If they - twinkled back - 
Conviction might, of me - 

[280] 



I told myself, "Take Courage, Friend - 
That was a former time- 
But we might learn to like the Heaven, 
As well as our Old Home!" 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 85 (Bingham 323). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 145-146. The metrical irregularities of 
lines 7, 8 and i o, 1 1 are smoothed by realignment. 



352. 

Perhaps I asked too large - 
I take -no less than skies - 
For Earths, grow thick as 
Berries, in my native town - 

My Basket holds - just - Firmaments - 
Those -dangle easy -on my arm, 
But smaller bundles -Cram. 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 85 (Bingham 32b). The poem is 
complete and the customary horizontal line is drawn neatly after line 7. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 306. "Berries" (line 4) concludes line 3. 
The poem is placed among the unfinished poems. 



353 

A happy lip - breaks sudden - 
It does'nt state you how 
It contemplated - smiling - 
Just consummated- now - 
But this one, wears it's merriment 
So patient -like a pain- 
Fresh gilded -to elude the eyes 
Unqualified, to scan- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 14 (H 770). 
PUBLICATION: This poem has a confused publishing history. In UP 
(1935), 123, the last four lines only were published, and there appear 



as a third (and final) stanza of "Her smile was shaped like other smiles/ 1 
In AB (1945), 393, all eight lines are published, and there appear as the 
third and fourth stanzas of "Her smile was shaped like other smiles." 
In the packet sheet, however, the two poems are clearly separated by a 
horizontal line, ED's invariable method of indicating the end of one poem 
and the beginning of another when two poems are copied, as these are, 
onto one sheet. In the packet they are without stanza division. Why Mrs. 
Bianchi omitted the first four lines in compiling Unpublished Poems is 
not clear. Mrs. Bingham, in restoring them in AB, worked from a typescript 
prepared by Mrs. Todd. On the typescript both appear on the same sheet, 
but they are separated by a line of asterisks. Observed separately, they 
clearly express quite different ideas about the motive and quality of 
"smiles." In UP the phrase "it's merriment" is altered to "a merriment." 



354 

From Cocoon forth a Butterfly 
As Lady from her Door 
Emerged -a Summer Afternoon - 
Repairing Everywhere 

Without Design - that I could trace 
Except to stray abroad 
On Miscellaneous Enterprise 
The Clovers- understood - 

Her pretty Parasol be seen 
Contracting in a Field 
Where Men made Hay- 
Then struggling hard 
With an opposing Cloud 

Where Parties -Phantom as Herself 
To Nowhere - seemed to go 
In purposeless Circumference - 
As 'twere a Tropic Show- 

And notwithstanding Bee -that worked - 

And Flower -that zealous blew- [no stanza break] 

[282] 



This Audience of Idleness 
Disdained them, from the Sky- 

Till Sundown crept -a steady Tide- 
And Men that made the Hay- 
And Afternoon - and Butterfly ~ 
Extinguished - in the Sea - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H 1493). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 118-119, titled "The Butterfly's Day." 
The third stanza is regularized. Two words are altered: 

9. be] was 25. the] its 



355 

'Tis Opposites - entice - 
Deformed Men - ponder Grace - 
Bright fires -the Blanketless- 
The Lost -Day's face- 

The Blind -esteem it be 
Enough Estate -to see- 
The Captive - strangles new- 
For deeming -Beggars- play - 

To lack-enamor Thee- 
Tho' the Divinity - 
Be only 
Me- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H 1490. 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 9. 

356 

The Day that I was crowned 
Was like the other Days - 
Until the Coronation came- 
And then -'twas Otherwise- 

[283] 



As Carbon in the Coal 
And Carbon in the Gem 
Are One -and yet the former 
Were dull for Diadem - 

I rose, and all was plain - 
But when the Day declined 
Myself and It, in Majesty 
Were equally - adorned - 

The Grace that I -was chose - 
To Me -surpassed the Crown 
That was the Witness for the Grace - 
'Twas even that 'twas Mine- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H 1503). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 96. 



357 

God is a distant - stately Lover - 

Woos, as He states us -by His Son- 

Verily, a Vicarious Courtship - 

"Miles", and "Priscilla", were such an One - 

But, lest the Soul -like fair "Priscilla" 
Choose the Envoy -and spurn the Groom - 
Vouches, with hyperbolic archness - 
"Miles", and "John Alden" were Synonyme - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H i5<x). 

PUBLICATION: This poem has an unusual publishing history. While 
the second series of Poems (1891) was being assembled, Mrs. Todd, who 
intended to include the lines there, sent them to S. J. Barrows, editor of 
a Boston weekly religious journal, The Christian Register. She evidently 
hoped their pre-publication would give a foretaste of ED's wit and un- 
conventionality in treating sacrosanct themes. Barrows was delighted with 
the poem and shared her reasons for submitting it: "Would that we might 
always think that genius had its Easter," he comments in thanking her, 



"and was not buried in the tomb." He published it in the issue of 2 April 
(LXX, 1891, 202). His position, however creditable intellectually, proved 
editorially unsound. "I have had two letters," he wrote Mrs. Todd on 22 
April, "from readers who have been greatly shocked by the poem of Emily 
Dickinson which I published, and Rev. Brooke Herford who forwarded 
one of them says: It is one of the most offensive bits of contemptuous 
Unitarianism that I have met with.' " Herford was the Unitarian minister 
of the Arlington Street Church in Boston. Barrows, seeing nothing more 
irreverent in it than in the metaphors of the Song of Solomon or in the 
representation of the Church as the Bride of Christ in the Apocalypse, 
continues: "But it makes some difference whether such a poem has the 
stamp of traditional authority upon it or not." To soothe offended readers 
Barrows carried an editorial in the last April issue of the Register stoutly 
defending ED's position and incidentally his own. (The letters from 
Barrows to Mrs. Todd, and a discussion of the early publishing history of 
the poem, are in AB, 124-125.) Mrs. Todd decided to omit the poem 
from the forthcoming volumes of Poems, issued in November 1891. 
After the passage of nearly forty years Mrs. Bianchi, who was not aware 
that the poem had been published in the Register, issued it in FP (1929), 
198, with a note stating: "First four lines only before published in a paper 
by her niece." The indignant letters and notices which followed led her 
to omit it from the Centenary edition issued in the following year, and 
from subsequent collections. The poem was not issued again until it ap- 
peared in AB, 124. The text in the Register and in AB derives from a 
transcript made by Mrs. Todd. One word is altered: 

2. states] tells 

In FP three alterations are made: 

2. as He states] so He tells 4] Miles' and Priscilla's such a one 

3. Verily] Surely 

ED uses the older spelling "synonyme" which is not retained in any 
printed text. 

358 

If any sink, assure that this, now standing - 
Failed like Themselves - and conscious that it rose - 
Grew by the Fact, and not the Understanding 
How Weakness passed -or Force- arose - 

[285] 



Tell that the Worst, is easy in a Moment - 
Dread, but the Whizzing, before the Ball - 
When the Ball enters, enters Silence - 
Dying annuls the power to kill. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H i5od). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 10. 



359 

I gained it so 
By Climbing slow 
By Catching at the Twigs that grow 
Between the Bliss -and me- 
lt hung so high 
As well the Sky 
Attempt by Strategy 

I said I gained it- 

This-was all- 

Look, how I clutch it 

Lest it fall- 

And I a Pauper go- 

Unfitted by an instant's Grace 

For the Contented - Beggar's face 

I wore an hour ago- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 CH 2ob). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 78. 



360 

Death sets a Thing significant 
The Eye had hurried by 
Except a perished Creature 
Entreat us tenderly 

[a86] 



To ponder little Workmanships 

In Crayon, or in Wool, 

With "This was last Her fingers did"- 

Industrious until - 

The Thimble weighed too heavy - 
The stitches stopped - themselves ~ 
And then 'twas put among the Dust 
Upon the Closet shelves - 

A Book I have -a friend gave- 

Whose Pencil - here and there - 

Had notched the place that pleased Him- 

At Rest -His fingers are- 

Now-when I read -I read not- 
For interrupting Tears - 
Obliterate the Etchings 
Too Costly for Repairs. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H 2oc). The copy of Emerson's 
Poems, which Benjamin Newton sent ED in 1850, was a cherished pos- 
session. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 194-195, titled "Memorials." 



361 

What I can do -I will- 
Though it be little as a Daffodil - 
That I cannot -must be 
Unknown to possibility - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H 2od). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 71. The last word of line 2, printed as a 
separate line, is restored in later collections. One word is altered: 

3. That] What 



[287] 



362 

It struck me - every Day - 
The Lightning was as new 
As if the Cloud that instant slit 
And let the Fire through - 

It burned Me -in the Night - 
It Blistered to My Dream - 
It sickened fresh upon my sight - 
With every Morn that came- 

I thought that Storm - was brief - 
The Maddest - quickest by -* 
But Nature lost the Date of This- 
And left it in the Sky- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H 22c). 

PUBLICATION: The first stanza only was printed in the Amherst Literary 
Monthly, June 1891, among "Suggestions from the Poems of Emily 
Dickinson" by Henry Park Schauffler. All three stanzas are in Poems 
(1896), 189, titled "The Soul's Storm." There are two alterations: 

6. to] in 8. Morn that came] morning's beam 



363 

I went to thank Her- 

But She Slept - 

Her Bed -a funneled Stone - 

With Nosegays at the Head and Foot - 

That Travellers - had thrown - 

Who went to thank Her- 
But She Slept - 
'Twas Short - to cross the Sea - 
To look upon Her like - alive - 
But turning back -'twas slow- 

[288] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 5 (H 22d). This is one of three 
poems ED wrote in memory of Elizabeth Barrett Browning who died 30 
June 1 86 1. See also the poem beginning "Her 'Last Poems' -Poets ended," 
and "I think I was enchanted." 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890) , 123. 

3 6 4 

The Morning after Wo- 
'Tis frequently the Way- 
Surpasses all that rose before - 
For utter Jubilee - 

As Nature did not care - 
And piled her Blossoms on - 
And further to parade a Joy 
Her Victim stared upon - 

The Birds declaim their Tunes - 
Pronouncing every word 
Like Hammers - Did they know they fell 
Like Litanies of Lead - 

On here and there -a creature - 
They'd modify the Glee 
To fit some Crucifixal Clef - 
Some Key of Calvary - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 13 (H 623). In line 3 "rose" is 
marked for an alternative, but none is given. 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 134. The spelling of "Crucifixal" (line 15) 
is rendered "Crucifixial" in L/P; "Crucificial" in Poems (current). 



365 

Dare you see a Soul at the White Heat? 

Then crouch within the door- 

Red -is the Fire's common tint 

But when the vivid Ore [no stanza break] 

[289] 



Has vanquished Flame's conditions, 
It quivers from the Forge 
Without a color, but the light 
Of unannointed Blaze. 
Least Village has it's Blacksmith 
Whose Anvil's even ring 
Stands symbol for the finer Forge 
That soundless tugs- within - 
Refining these impatient Ores 
With Hammer, and with Blaze 
Until the Designated Light 
Repudiate the Forge - 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The fair copy 
reproduced above (Bingham 9&~4B-y) is a redaction of the semifinal draft 
in packet 13 (H 63b) below. It adopts all the suggested changes and pre- 
sents a variant in line 9: boasts] has 

Dare you see a soul at the "White Heat: 1 " 
Then crouch within the door- 
Red-is the Fire's common tint- 
But when the quickened Ore 

Has sated Flame's conditions - 
She quivers from the Forge 
Without a color, but the Light 
Of unannointed Blaze - 

Least Village, boasts it's Blacksmith - 
Whose Anvil's even ring 
Stands symbol for the finer Forge 
That soundless tugs- within - 

Refining these impatient Ores 
With Hammer, and with Blaze 
Until the designated Light 
Repudiate the Forge - 

4. quickened] vivid 6. She] It 

5. sated] vanquished 

A second fair copy, now missing, is listed by T. W. Higginson as one of 
the poems that ED had sent to him. His list was enclosed in a letter he 
wrote Mrs. Todd on 13 May 1891 (AB, 129) to tell her exactly which 

[290] 



poems he had in the event she lacked a copy and needed one in order to 
prepare the text of the Second Series of Poems on which they were then 
working. It is unlikely that the fair copy reproduced above was Higgin- 
son's. The list he enclosed specifically notes that she already has a copy, 
presumably the packet copy, which is the source of the published text in 
Poems. 

PUBLICATION: The poem, titled "The White Heat," was first published 
in Atlantic Monthly, LXVIII (October 1891), 454, incorporated in an 
article which Higginson wrote dealing with the letters and poems that he 
had received from ED. Unless the copy she sent him is found, it will be 
impossible to know certainly whether his copy was the source of the text. 
Oddly, it probably was not, for the version in the Atlantic is identical in 
text and form with that in Poems (1891), 28, tided "The White Heat" 
This version, published later in the same year, almost certainly derives 
from the packet copy. It is arranged as four quatrains and adopts only the 
suggested change for line 4. There are two alterations, both made to effect 
rhymes : 

6] Its quivering substance plays 10. ring] din 

Writing to Col. Higginson on 13 July 1891, Mrs. Todd says (AB, 137): 

I suppose you will not wish to change the line in the <r White Heat" 
only as she makes blaze and forge as rhymes in the last stanza, 
I thought it might be good not to have them in that relation twice. 
Few changes seem necessary anywhere. 

Higginson evidently approved, for the changes were made in his article 
as well as in the collected edition of Poems. 



366 

Although I put away his life- 
An Ornament too grand 
For Forehead low as mine, to wear, 
This might have been the Hand 

That sowed the flower, he pref erred - 
Or smoothed a homely pain, 
Or pushed the pebble from his path- 
Or played his chosen tune - 



On Lute the least -the latest - 
But just his Ear could know 
That whatsoe'er delighted it, 
I never would let go - 

The foot to bear his errand - 

A little Boot I know- 

Would leap abroad like Antelope - 

With just the grant to do - 

His weariest Commandment - 

A sweeter to obey, 

Than "Hide and Seek"- 

Or skip to Flutes - 

Or All Day, chase the Bee- 

Your Servant, Sir, will weary - 
The Surgeon, will not come- 
The World, will have it's own -to do 
The Dust, will vex your Fame - 

The Cold will force your tightest door 
Some Febuary Day, 
But say my apron bring the sticks 
To make your Cottage gay- 

That I may take that promise 
To Paradise, with me- 
To teach the Angels, avarice, 
You, Sir, taught first -to me. 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 13 (H 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 160-161. The text is arranged as eight 
quatrains. The last line is rendered: 

Your kiss first taught to me. 

One other word is altered: 

5. flower] flowers 

[39*1 



Over and over, like a Tune - 
The Recollection plays - 
Drums off the Phantom Battlements 
Cornets of Paradise - 

Snatches, from Baptized Generations - 

Cadences too grand 

But for the Justified Processions 

At the Lord's Right hand. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 13 (H 640. 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 1 12. Stanza 2, arranged in five lines, in later 
collections is restored to a quatrain. One word is altered: 

3. off] of 



368 

How sick -to wait -in any place -but thine - 
I knew last night -when someone tried to twine - 
Thinking - perhaps - that I looked tired - or alone - 
Or breaking - almost - with unspoken pain - 

And I turned - ducal - 

That right -was thine - 

One port - suffices - for a Brig -like mine- 

Our's be the tossing -wild though the sea- 
Rather than a Mooring -unshared by thee. 
Our's be the Cargo - unladen - here - 
Rather than the "spicy isles-" 
And thou - not there - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 13 (H 66a). 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 158. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. The italics are not reproduced and the stanzas are 
regularized into five quatrains. 



369 

She lay as if at play 
Her life had leaped away- 
Intending to return - 
But not so soon- 

Her merry Arms, half dropt- 
As if for lull of sport - 
An instant had forgot 
The Trick to start - 

Her dancing Eyes- ajar - 
As if their Owner were 
Still sparkling through 
For fun at you - 

Her Morning at the door- 
Devising, I am sure- 
To force her sleep - 
So light - so deep - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 13 (H 66c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 129. 



370 

Heaven is so far of the Mind 
That were the Mind dissolved - 
The Site -of it -by Architect 
Could not again be proved 

'Tis vast - as our Capacity - 
As fair - as our idea - 
To Him of adequate desire 
No further 'tis, than Here - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 13 (H 66d). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 108. 

[2.94] 



A precious - mouldering pleasure - 'tis - 
To meet aix. Antique Book- 
In just the Dress his Century wore - 
A privilege -I think - 

His venerable Hand to take - 
And warming in our own - 
A passage back -or two -to make- 
To Times when he -was young - 

His quaint opinions -to inspect - 
His thought to ascertain 
On Them[e]s concern our mutual mind- 
e Literature of Man - 



What interested Scholars - most - 
What Competitions ran- 
When Plato -was a Certainty - 
And Sophocles -a Man- 

When Sappho -was a living Girl- 
And Beatrice wore 
The Gown that Dante - deified - 
Facts Centuries before 

He traverses - familiar - 

As One should come to Town- 

And tell you all your Dreams - were true - 

He lived -where Dreams were born- 

His presence is Enchantment - 

You beg him not to go - 

Old Volumes shake their Vellum Heads 

And tantalize - just so- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 16 (H 85). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 22-23, titled: "In a Library/' Stanza 
three is altered to read: 



His quaint opinions to inspect, 
His knowledge to unfold 
On what concerns our mutual mind, 
The literature of old; 

In line 24 a further alteration was made to effect a rhyme: 

born] sown 

When the poem was collected in CP (1924), stanza three was printed as 
in Poems (1890), but the alteration in line 24 was corrected; and thus 
the text stands in current editions. 



372 

I know lives, I could miss 
Without a Misery - 
Others -whose instant's wanting - 
Would be Eternity - 

The last -a scanty Number - 
'Twould scarcely fill a Two- 
The first -a Gnat's Horizon 
Could easily outgrow - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 16 (H 86d). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 163. Line 2 is altered to read: "Without 
misery." 



373 

I'm saying every day 
"If I should be a Queen, tomorrow" - 
I'd do this way- 
And so I deck, a litt[l]e, 

If it be, I wake a Bourbon, 
None on me, bend supercilious - 
With "This was she - 
Begged in the Market place - 
Yesterday." 

[296] 



Court is a stately place - 
I've heard men say- 
So I loop my apron, against the Majesty 
With bright Pins of Buttercup - 
That not too plain- 
Rank- overtake me- 

And perch my Tongue 
On Twigs of singing - rather high - 
But this, might be my brief Term 
To qualify - 

Put from my simple speech all plain word- 
Take other accents, as such I heard 
Though but for the Cricket - just, 
And but for the Bee- 
Not in all the Meadow - 
One accost me- 

Better to be ready - 
Than did next morn 
Meet me in Arragon- 
My old Gown- on - 

And the surprised Air 
Rustics- wear - 
Summoned - unexpectedly - 
To Exeter - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 16 (H 8ya). In line 6 "bend" is 
marked for an alternative, but none is given. 

PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CLVI (November 1935), 5 6o > tided 
"If I Should Be a Queen"; UP (1935), 35~36> without tide. The text is 
arranged without stanza division, and many of the line spacings are 
changed. One phrase is altered: 

26. to be] be 



374 

I went to Heaven - 
*Twas a small Town- 
Lit-with a Ruby- 
Lathed-with Down- 

Stiller - than the fields 
At the full Dew- 
Beautiful-as Pictures - 
No Man drew. 
People -like the Moth- 
Of Mechlin - frames - 
Duties -of Gossamer - 
And Eider - names - 
Almost - contented - 
I - could be - 
'Mong such unique 
Society - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 16 (H 87^. 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 196. It is without stanza division. 



375 

The Angle of a Landscape - . ; 
That every time I wake- 
Between my Curtain and the Wall 
Upon an ample Crack - 

Like a Venetian waiting - 
Accosts my open eye- 
Is just a Bough of Apples - 
Held slanting, in the Sky - 

The Pattern of a Chimney - 
The Forehead of a Hill- 
Sometimes-a Vane's Forefinger - 
But that's -Occasional - 

[298] 



The Seasons -shift -my Picture - 
Upon my Emerald Bough, 
I wake -to find no- Emeralds- 
Then- Diamonds -which the Snow 

v From Polar Caskets -fetched me- 
The Chimney -and the Hill- 
And just the Steeple's finger - 
These -never stir at all- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 16 (H 88a). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 84-85. It derives from a transcript made 
by Mrs. Todd. 

37 6 

Of Course - 1 prayed - 

And did God Care? 

He cared as much as on the Air 

A Bird -had stamped her foot- 

And cried "Give Me"- 

My Reason- Life - 

I had not had -but for Yourself - 

'Twere better Charity 

To leave me in the Atom's Tomb - 

Merry, and Nought, and gay, and numb- 

Than this smart Misery. 

- - - ^ 
MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 16 (H 88d). 

PUBLICATION: Saturday Review of Literature, V (9 March 1929), 751; 
FP (1929), 44. The text is arranged as two stanzas of 6 and 9 lines. 



377 

To lose one's faith - surpass 
The loss of an Estate - 
Because Estates can be 
Replenished - faith cannot - 



Inherited with Life- 
Belief-but once -can be- 
Annihilate a single clause - 
And Being's -Beggary - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 9oc). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 51, titled "Lost Faith." One word is 
altered: 

i. surpass] surpasses 



378 

I saw no Way - The Heavens were stitched - 
I felt the Columns close - 
The Earth reversed her Hemispheres - 
I touched the Universe - 

And back it slid - and I alone - 
A Speck upon a Ball - 
Went out upon Circumference - 
Beyond the Dip of Bell - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 9od), 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 23. 



379 

Rehearsal to Ourselves 
Of a Withdrawn Delight - 
Affords a Bliss like Murder - 
Omnipotent - Acute - 

We will not drop the Dirk - 
Because We love the Wound 
The Dirk Commemorate -Itself 
Remind Us that we died. 

[300] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 93c). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 179. Stanza 2, arranged in five lines, in later 
collections is restored as a quatrain, with the last word in line 7 beginning 
line 8. The misprint "did" for "died" (line 8) is corrected in Poems (cur- 
rent). 

380 

There is a flower that Bees prefer - 
And Butterflies -desire - 
To gain the Purple Democrat 
The Humming Bird aspire - 

And Whatsoever Insect pass- 
A Honey bear away 
Proportioned to his several dearth 
And her - capacity - 

Her face be rounder than the Moon 
And ruddier than the Gown 
Of Orchis in the Pasture - 
Or Rhododendron- worn - 

She doth not wait for June - 
Before the World be Green - 
Her sturdy little Countenance 
Against the Wind -be seen- 

Con tending with the Grass - 
Near Kinsman to Herself - 
For Privilege of Sod and Sun - 
Sweet Litigants for Life- 

And when the Hills be full- 
And newer fashions blow- 
Doth not retract a single spice 
For pang of jealousy - 

Her Public -be the Noon- 

Her Providence - the Sun- [no stanza break] 



Her Progress -by the Bee- proclaimed - 
In sovreign - Swerveless Tune - 

The Bravest -of the Host- 
Surrendering -the last- 
Nor even of Defeat- aware - 
When cancelled by the Frost - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 94a). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 85-86, tided "Purple Clover." Seven 
words are altered: 

4. Humming Bird] humming-birds 16. be] is 

6. bear] bears 21. be] is 

9. be] is 25. be] is 
14. be] is 



A Secret told- 

Ceases to be a Secret - then - 

A Secret- kept - 

That -can appal but One- 

Better of it -continual be afraid- 

Than it- 

And Whom you told it to -beside - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 94b). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 2,9- The text is arranged in eight lines with- 
out stanza division. 



For Death -or rather 

For the Things 'twould buy- 

This-put away 

Life's Opportunity - 

[302] 



The Things that Death will buy 
Are Room- 

Escape from Circumstances - 
And a Name- 

With Gifts of Life 

How Death's Gifts may compare - 

We know not- 

For the Rates -lie Here- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 94c). 
PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 78. The text is printed without stanza 
division. Five words differ: 

2. 'twould] 'twill 10. How] With 

3. This] These 12. lie] stop 
9. With] How 

The alterations are of such a nature as to suggest that the printed text 
derived from a variant copy, now lost. 

383 

Exhiliration - is within - 
There can no Outer Wine 
So royally intoxicate 
As that diviner Brand 

The Soul achieves - Herself - 
To drink or set away 
For Visiter - Or Sacrament - 
Tis not of Holiday 

To stimulate a Man 
Who hath the Ample Rhine 
Within his Closet -Best you can 
Exhale in offering. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 673). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 21, A misprint, "May" for "Man" (line 9), 
is corrected in Poems (current). 

[303] 



No Rack can torture me- 
My Soul -at Liberty - 
Behind this mortal Bone 
There knits a bolder One 

You Cannot prick with saw- 
Nor pierce with Cimitar- 
Two Bodies -therefore be- 
Bind One -The Other fly- 

The Eagle of his Nest 
No easier divest - 
And gain the Sky 
Than mayest Thou- 

Except Thyself may be 
Thine Enemy - 
Captivity is Consciousness - 
So's Liberty. 

MANUSCRIPT: Afyout 1862, in packet 17 (H 68a). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 147, titled "Emancipation." There are 
three alterations: 

a. Soul] soul's 8. The Other fly] and one will flee 

6. pierce] rend 



385 

Smiling back from Coronation 
May be Luxury- 

On the Heads that started with us - 
Beings Peasantry- 

Recognizing in Procession 
Ones We former knew- 
When Ourselves were also dusty - 
Centuries ago- 

[304] 



Had the Triumph no Conviction 
Of how many be- 
Stimulated-by the Contrast- 
Unto Misery - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 68c). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 275-276. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



386 

Answer July- 
Where is the Bee- 
Where is the Blush - 
Where is the Hay? 

Ah, said July- 
Where is the Seed- 
Where is the Bud - 
Where is the May- 
Answer Thee - Me - 

Nay -said the May- 
Show me the Snow- 
Show me the Bells - 
Show me the Jay! 

Quibbled the Jay- 
Where be the Maize - 
Where be the Haze- 
Where be the Bur? 
Here -said the Year- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 95b). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 55. 



[305] 



The Sweetest Heresy recieved 

That Man and Woman know 

Each Other's Convert - 

Though the Faith accommodate but Two - 

The Churches are so frequent - 
The Ritual - so small 
The Grace so unavoidable - 
To fail is Infidel 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H p6c). 

PUBLICATION: FP (192.9), 42. The misspelling in line i is corrected. 

388 

Take Your Heaven further on - 
This to Heaven divine Has gone- 
Had You earlier blundered in 
Possibly, e'en You had seen 
An Eternity -put on- 
Now - to ring a Door beyond 
Is the utmost of Your Hand - 
To the Skies apologize - 
Nearer to Your Courtesies 
Than this Sufferer polite - 
Dressed to meet You- 
See-in White! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 17 (H 96d). 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 121. The last two lines are printed as one. 

389 

There's been a Death, in the Opposite House, 

As lately as Today - 

I know it, by the numb look 

Such Houses have-alway- 

[306] 



The Neighbors rustle in and out- 
The Doctor -drives away- 
A Window opens like a Pod- 
Abrupt - mechanically 

Somebody flings a Mattrass out- 
The Children hurry by- 
They wonder if it died - on that - 
I used to -when a Boy- 

The Minister - goes stiffly in - 

As if the House were His - 

And He owned all the Mourners - now - 

And little Boys - besides - 

And then the Milliner -and the Man 

Of the Appalling Trade - 

To take the measure of the House - 

There'll be that Dark Parade - 

Of Tassels - and of Coaches - soon - 

It's easy as a Sign - 

The Intuition of the News- 

In just a Country Town - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H i^a). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 186-187. Lines 17-20 are arranged as 
quatrain. 



390 

It's Coming -the postponeless Creature - 
It gains the Block -and now -it gains the Door- 
Chooses it's latch, from all the other fastenings - 
Enters-with a "You know Me -Sir"? 

Simple Salute - and Certain Recognition - 
Bold -were it Enemy -Brief -were it friend- 

r , [no stanza break] 



Dresses each House in Crape, and Icicle - 
And Carries one -out of it -to God- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H ii5a). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), no. The text is arranged in fourteen lines 
without stanza division; in later collections the eight lines are restored but 
printed without stanza division. 



39 * 

A Visitor in Marl - 
Who influences Flowers - 
Till they are orderly as Busts- 
And Elegant -as Glass - 

Who visits in the Night - 
And just before the Sun- 
Concludes his glistening interview - 
Caresses -and is gone- 

But whom his fingers touched - 
And where his feet have run - 
And whatsoever Mouth he kissed - 
Is as it had not been - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H ii5c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 47. One word is altered: 

i. Marl] March 



392 

Through the Dark Sod -as Education - 
The Lily passes sure- 
Feels her white foot - no trepidation - 
Her faith - no fear - 

Afterward -in the Meadow - 

Swinging her Beryl Bell- [no stanza break] 

[308] 



The Mold-life-all forgotten- now -- 
In Extasy-and Dell- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H ii5d). 

PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIII (February 1929), 183; FP 
(1929), 76. The text is arranged as two stanzas of six and five lines; in 
later collections, as two of six and four lines. 



393 

Did Our Best Moment last- 
'Twould supersede the Heaven - 
A few -and they by Risk- procure - 
So this Sort - are not given - 

Except as stimulants - in 
Cases of Despair - 
Or Stupor -The Reserve - 
These Heavenly Moments are - 

A Grant of the Divine - 
That Certain as it Comes - 
Withdraws - and leaves the dazzled Soul 
In her unfurnished Rooms - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H n6a). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 20. The last word of line 5 is placed as 
the first of line 6. One word is altered: 

12. Rooms] room 



394 

'Twas Love -not me- 

Oh punish- pray - 

The Real one died for Thee- 

Just Him - not me - 

[39l 



Such Guilt -to love Thee -most! 
Doom it beyond the Rest- 
Forgive it -last - 
'Twas base as Jesus -most! 

Let Justice not mistake - 
We Two -looked so alike - 
Which was the Guilty Sake- 
'Twas Love's -Now Strike! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H u6c). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 163. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. Three words are altered: 

4. Just] Trust 8. Jesus] Jesus' 

5. Thee] the 



395 

Reverse cannot befall 
That fine Prosperity 
Whose Sources are interior - 
As soon - Adversity 

A Diamond -overtake 
In far -Bolivian Ground - 
Misfortune hath no implement 
Could mar it -if it found - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H nyb). 
PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 10. The text is arranged as a seven-line 
stanza. 

396 

There is a Languor of the Life 
More imminent than Pain- 
Tis Pain's Successor -When the Soul 
Has suffered all it can - 



A Drowsiness -diffuses - 
A Dimness like a Fog 
Envelopes Consciousness - 
As Mists - obliterate a Crag. 

The Surgeon -does not blanch -at pain- 
His Habit -is severe - 
But tell him that it ceased to feel- 
The Creature lying there - 

And he will tell you -skill is late- 
A Mightier than He- 
Has ministered before Him- 
There's no Vitality 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H ii4a). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 176. Three words are altered: 

8. Mists] mist 12. lying] going 

8. obliterate] obliterates 



397 

When Diamonds are a Legend, 
And Diadems -a Tale- 
I Brooch and Earrings for Myself, 
Do sow, and Raise for sale- 

And tho' I'm scarce accounted, 
My Art, a Summer Day - had Patrons 
Once -it was a Queen - 
And once -a Butterfly ~ 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 54. The last two words of line 6 are printed 
as the first two of line 7. 



398 

I had not minded -Walls - 
Were Universe -one Rock- 
And far I heard his silver Call 
The other side the Block - 

Td tunnel - till my Groove 

Pushed sudden thro* to his - 

Then my face take her Recompense - 

The looking in his Eyes - 

But 'tis a single Hair- 

A filament - a law - 

A Cobweb - wove in Adamant - 

A Battlement - of Straw - 

A limit like the Vail 
Unto the Lady's face - 
But every Mesh - a Citadel - 
And Dragons - in the Crease - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H ii4c). 
PUBLICATION: New York Herald Tribune Book Review, 10 March 
1929, page i; FP (1929), 166. Words in two lines are altered: 

5. till] until 7. her recompense] recompense 



399 

A House upon the Hight- 
That Wagon never reached - 
No Dead, were ever carried down - 
No Peddler's Cart- approached - 

Whose Chimney never smoked - 
Whose Windows - Night and Morn - 
Caught Sunrise first -and Sunset- last - 
Then -held an Empty Pane- 



Whose fate -Conjecture knew- 
No other neighbor - did - 
And what it was- we never lisped - 
Because He never told- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 21 (H ii4d). In line n "it" is 
an editorial correction for ED's slip of "is." 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 279. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



400 

A Tongue - to tell Him I am true! 
It's fee -to be of Gold- 
Had Nature - in Her monstrous House 
A single Ragged Child - 

To earn a Mine -would run 

That Interdicted Way, 

And tell Him -Charge thee speak it plain 

That so far - Truth is True? 

And answer What I do - 

Beginning with the Day 

That Night- begun - 

Nay - Midnight - 'twas - 

Since Midnight -happened- say - 

If once more - Pardon - Boy - 
The Magnitude thou may 
Enlarge my Message -If too vast 
Another Lad -help thee- 

Thy Pay -in Diamonds- be - 
And His -in solid Gold- 
Say Rubies - if He hesitate - 
My Message -must be told- 



Say -last I said -was This- 
That when the Hills -come down- 
And hold no higher than the Plain - 
My Bond -have just begun - 

And when the Heavens - disband - 
And Deity conclude - 
Then -look for me. Be sure you say- 
Least Figure -on the Road- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 91 (Bingham 743). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 147-148. 

401 

What Soft -Cherubic Creatures - 
These Gentlewomen are- 
One would as soon assault a Plush - 
Or violate a Star- 

Such Dimity Convictions - 
A Horror so refined 
Of freckled Human Nature - 
Of Deity ashamed - 

It's such a common -Glory - 
A Fisherman's- Degree - 
Redemption - Brittle Lady - 
Be so -ashamed of Thee- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 91 (Bingham 74c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 62. 



402 

I pay -in Satin Cash- 
Ybu did not state - your price - 
A Petal, for a Paragraph 
[s near as I can guess - 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 70. 



43 

The Winters are so short - 
I'm hardly justified 
In sending all the Birds away- 
And moving into Pod- 

Myself-for scarcely settled - 

The Phebes have begun - 

And then -it's time to strike my Tent 

And open House- again - 

It's mostly, interruptions - 
My Summer is despoiled - 
Because there was a Winter- once - 
And all the Cattle- starved - 

And so there was a Deluge - 
And swept the World away- 
But Ararat's a Legend - now - 
And no one credits Noah - 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 42. 



404 

How many Flowers fail in Wood 
Or perish from the Hill 
Without the privilege to know 
That they are Beautiful - 

How many cast a nameless Pod 
Upon the nearest Breeze - 
Unconscious of the Scarlet Freight - 
It bear to Other Eyes- 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H 137!)). 
PUBLICATION: FP (192.9), 82. One word is altered: 

8. bear] bears 



405 

It might be lonelier 
Without the Loneliness - 
I'm so accustomed to my Fate- 
Perhaps the Other- Peace - 

Would interrupt the Dark- 
And crowd the little Room- 
Too scant -by Cubits -to contain 
The Sacrament -of Him- 

I am not used to Hope - 

It might intrude upon- 

It's sweet parade - blaspheme the place 

Ordained to Suffering - 

It might be easier 
To fail -with Land in Sight - 
Than gain - My Blue Peninsula - 
To perish -of Delight - 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H 

PUBLICATION: The final stanza was published as a separate poem in 
Poems (1896), 64, titled "Philosophy." It has been thus separately in- 
cluded in all later collections. All four stanzas were published in UP 
(1935), 1 02, with line i rendered: "It might have been lonelier." 



406 

Some -Work for Immortality - 
The Chief er part, for Time- 
He - Compensates - immediately - 
The former -Checks -on Fame- 



Slow Gold -but Everlasting - 
The Bullion of Today - 
Contrasted with the Currency 
Of Immortality - 

A Beggar -Here and There - 
Is gifted to discern 
Beyond the Broker's insight - 
One's - Money One's - the Mine 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 5. Three words are italicized: 

2. Time 12. Mine 

12. Money 

The misprint in line 2 (of for for) was corrected in the Centenary edition 
(1930). 



407 

If What we Could -were what we would - 

Criterion -be small - 

It is the Ultimate of Talk- 

The Impotence to Tell- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H i38d). 
PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 15. 



408 

Unit, like Death, for Whom? 

True, like the Tomb, 

Who tells no secret 

Told to Him- 

The Grave is strict - 

Tickets admit 

Just two -the Bearer - 

And the Borne - [no stanza break] 



And seat -just One- 

The Living- tell - 

The Dying -but a Syllable - 

The Coy Dead- None - 

No Chatter here -no tea- 

So Babbler, and Bohea-stay there - 

But Gravity -and Expectation - and Fear- 

A tremor just, that All's not sure. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H i39c). 

PUBLICATION: The first twelve lines only are in UP (1935), 135, and 
the text is arranged as three quatrains. The whole poem, derived from 
Mrs. Todd's transcript of the packet copy, is in New England Quarterly, 
XX Op47)> 42-; it is without stanza division and has an altered line ar- 
rangement. 

409 

They dropped like Flakes- 
They dropped like Stars - 
Like Petals from a Rose- 
When suddenly across the June 
A Wind with fingers - goes - 

They perished in the Seamless Grass - 
No eye could find the place - 
But God can summon every face 
On his Repealless-List. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 25 (H i4ob). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 190, titled 'The Battle-Field." The 
transcript, made by Mrs. Todd, from which the published version derives, 
is among the T. W. Higginson papers at BPL, It is an accurate script, 
but penciled editing in the handwriting of Higginson regularizes the first 
stanza into a quatrain by combining lines i and 2, and effects a rhyme 
for lines 6 and 8 by altering the word order of the last two lines to read: 



But God on his repealless list 
Can summon every face. 



The text is so printed. 



410 

The first Day's Night had come- 
And grateful that a thing 
So terrible -had been endured - 
I told my Soul to sing- 

She said her Strings were snapt- 
Her Bow - to Atoms blown 
And so to mend her -gave me work 
Until another Morn- 

And then - a Day as huge 
As Yesterdays in pairs, 
Unrolled it's horror in my face - 
Until it blocked my eyes - 

My Brain - begun to laugh - 

I mumbled -like a fool- 

And tho' 'tis Years ago - that Day - 

My Brain keeps giggling -still. 

And Something's odd- within - 
That person that I was - 
And this One -do not feel the same- 
Could it be Madness - this*? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 2,6 (H 1413). 

PUBLICATION: The first three stanzas only are published in UP (1935), 
13. The entire poem is printed in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 
40-41, from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd; here the two final stanzas 
are first published. There are alterations as follows: 

10. Yesterdays] Yesterday [UP]; yes- n. in] on [UP only; corrected in 

terday [NEQ] NEQ] 

13. begun] began [NEQ] 



The Color of the Grave is Green - 
The Outer Grave -I mean- 
You would not know it from the Field - 
Except it own a Stone - 

To help the fond to find it - 
Too infinite asleep 
To stop and tell them where it is 
But just a Daisy - deep - 

The Color of the Grave is white 
The outer Grave -I mean- 
You would not know it from the Drifts - 
In Winter -till the Sun- 

Has furrowed out the Aisles - 
Then -higher than the Land 
The little Dwelling Houses rise 
Where each -has left a friend - 

The Color of the Grave within - 
The Duplicate I mean 
Not all the Snows c'd make it white - 
Not all the Summers- Green - 

YouVe seen the Color- maybe - 
Upon a Bonnet bound - 
When that you met it with before - 
The Ferret -Cannot find- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H i4ib). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 138. Two words are altered: 

5. To help] It helps 10. outer] Winter 



4 I2 

I read my sentence steadily - 

Reviewed it with my eyes, 

To see that I made no mistake 

In it's extremest clause - 

The Date, and manner, of the shame - 

And then the Pious Form 

That "God have mercy" on the Soul 

The Jury voted Him - 

I made my soul familiar - with her extremity - 

That at the last, it should not be a novel Agony 

But she, and Death, acquainted - 

Meet tranquilly, as friends - 

Salute, and pass, without a Hint- 

And there, the Matter ends- 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 188. The text is arranged as four quat- 
rains. 



413 

I never felt at Home - Below - 
And in the Handsome Skies 
I shall not feel at Home -I know- 
I dont like Paradise - 

Because it's Sunday -all the time- 
And Recess -never comes - 
And Eden'll be so lonesome 
Bright Wednesday Afternoons - 

If God could make a visit - 
Or ever took a Nap - 
So not to see us -but they say 
Himself -a Telescope 



Perennial beholds us- 

Myself would run away 

From Him -and Holy Ghost -and All- 

But there's the "Judgment Day"! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 1433). 

PUBLICATION: Saturday Review of Literature, V (9 March 1929), 751; 
FP (1929), 43. The text of stanza i, arranged as five lines, in later collec- 
tions is arranged as a quatrain. 



414 

'Twas like a Maelstrom, with a notch, 
That nearer, every Day, 
Kept narrowing it's boiling Wheel 
Until the Agony 

Toyed coolly with the final inch 
Of your delirious Hem- 
And you dropt, lost, 
When something broke - 
And let you from a Dream - 

As if a Goblin with a Guage - 
Kept measuring the Hours - 
Until you felt your Second 
Weigh, helpless, in his Paws- 

And not a Sinew -stirred -could help, 
And sense was setting numb- 
When God -remembered -and the Fiend 
Let go, then, Overcome - 

\s if your Sentence stood -pronounced - 

!\nd you were frozen led 

From Dungeon's luxury of Doubt 

To Gibbets, and the "Dead- ' ^ 



And when the Film had stitched your eyes 
A Creature gasped "Repreive"! 
Which Anguish was the utterest - then - 
To perish, or to live? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 1723). The second line of 
the last stanza is marked for an alternative reading, but none is given. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 183. The text, arranged as six quatrains, 
derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. The first word of line 12 
is printed as the last of line 1 1 . 



415 

Sunset at Night - is natural - 
But Sunset on the Dawn 
Reverses Nature - Master - 
So Midnight's -due -at Noon. 

Eclipses be- predicted - 
And Science bows them in - 
But do one face us suddenly - 
Jehovah's Watch - is wrong. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H i72c). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 75. One word altered in line 4 (midnight 
for midnight's') was corrected in Poems (current). Two other alterations 
remain : 

2. on] in 7. do] so 



416 

\ Murmur in the Trees - to note - 
Not loud enough - for Wind - 
\ Star - not far enough to seek - 
Nor near enough - to find - 

\ long -long Yellow -on the Lawn- 

\ Hubbub -as of feet- [no stanza break] 

[323] 



Not audible -as Our's-to Us- 
But dapperer-More Sweet - 

A Hurrying Home of little Men 
To Houses unperceived- 
All this and more -if I should tell- 
Would never be believed - 

Of Robins in the Trundle bed 

How many I espy 

Whose Nightgowns could not hide the Wings 

Although I heard them try- 

But then I promised ne'er to tell - 
How could I break My Word? 
So go your Way - and I'll go Mine - 
No fear you'll miss the Road. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H iy3a). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), iio-m. 



It is dead - Find it - 
Out of sound -Out of sight - 
"Happy"? Which is wiser - 
You, or the Wind? 
"Conscious"? Wont you ask that 
Of the low Ground? 

"Homesick"? Many met it- 
Even through them -This 
Cannot testify - 
Themself-as dumb- 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 96. A misreading of Sun for You (line 4) 
was corrected in Poems (current). The last line is altered to read: 

Themselves dumb. 



Not in this World to see his face - 
Sounds long -until I read the place 
Where this -is said to be 
But just the Primer -to a life- 
Unopened- rare -Upon the Shelf - 
Clasped yet -to Him -and me- 

And yet -My Primer suits me so 
I would not choose - a Book to know 
Than that -be sweeter wise- 
Might some one else - so learned - be - 
And leave me- just my A-B-C- 
Himself- could have the Skies - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H i73c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 132, titled "The First Lesson." 

419 

We grow accustomed to the Dark- 
When Light is put away- 
As when the Neighbor holds the Lamp 
To witness her Goodbye - 

A Moment -We uncertain step 
For newness of the night - 
Then -fit our Vision to the Dark- 
And meet the Road -erect - 

And so of larger- Darknesses - 
Those Evenings of the Brain - 
When not a Moon disclose a sign - 
Or Star - come out - within - 

The B[r]avest- grope a little - 
And sometimes hit a Tree 
Directly in the Forehead - 
But as they learn to see- 

[3*5] 



Either the Darkness alters - 
Or something in the sight 
Adjusts itself to Midnight - 
And Life steps almost straight. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 1743). 
PUBLICATION: Commonweal, XXIII (29 November 1935), 124; UP 
(1935), 16. One word is altered: 

3. holds] hold 



420 

You'll know it -as you know 'tis Noon- 

By Glory - 

As you do the Sun- 

By Glory - 

As you will in Heaven - 

Know God the Father -and the Son. 

;By intuition, Mightiest Things 
Assert themselves - and not by terms - 
"I'm Midnight" - need the Midnight say- 
'Tm Sunrise" - Need the Majesty? 

Omnipotence -had not a Tongue - 
His lisp -is Lightning -and the Sun- 
His Conversation -with the Sea- 
"How shall you know"? 
Consult your Eye! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H i74b). 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 83. The text is arranged as three quatrains. 

421 

A Charm invests a face 
Imperfectly beheld - 
The Lady dare not lift her Vail 
For fear it be dispelled- 

[3*6] 



But peers beyond her mesh- 
And wishes -and denies - 
Lest Interview - annul a want 
That Image- satisfies ~ 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 1740). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 101. 



422 

More Life -went out -when He went 
Than Ordinary Breath - 
Lit with a finer Phosphor - 
Requiring in the Quench - 

A Power of Renowned Cold, 
The Climate of the Grave 
A Temperature just adequate 
So Anthracite, to live - 

For some -an Ampler Zero- 
A Frost more needle keen 
Is nescessary, to reduce 
The Ethiop within. 

Others - extinguish easier - 
A Gnat's minutest Fan 
Sufficient to obliterate 
A Tract of Citizen - 

Whose Peat life -amply vivid - 
Ignores the solemn News 
That Popocatapel exists - 
Or Etna's Scarlets, Choose - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 48b). There has been 
much speculation upon the meaning of "Anthracite." In her youth ED 
greatly enjoyed Reveries of a Bachelor (1850) by Donald Grant Mitchell 
("Ik Marvel")- Mr. Richard Chase has pointed out in Emily Dickinson 



(i95O, 48, that in his second "revery," "By a City Grate," Mitchell makes 
a psychological distinction between "sea-coal" and "anthracite" types of 
people. The former he characterizes as "mercurial, shallow, unsteady, bril- 
liant"; the latter as stable, devoted, profound. ED has in mind by her 
phrase "So Anthracite, to live" the idea that the temperature of the grave 
is just adequate to quench the "finer Phosphor" of the more stable, pro- 
found type. 

PUBLICATION: The first four stanzas only are in Yale Review, XXV 
(September 1935), 36; UP (1935), 4, and later collections. The entire 
poem is in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 39-40, derived from a 
transcription of the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



4*3 

The Months have ends -the Years -a knot- 

No Power can untie 

To stretch a little further 

A Skein of Misery - 

The Earth lays back these tired lives 
In her mysterious Drawers - 
Too tenderly, that any doubt 
An ultimate Repose - 

The manner of the Children - 
Who weary of the Day- 
Themself-the noisy Plaything 
They cannot put away- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 48c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 117. Two words are altered: 

i. ends] end n. Themself] Themselves 



424 

Removed from Accident of Loss 
By Accident of Gain 
Befalling not my simple Days - 
Myself had just to earn - 

[3*8] 



Of Riches -as unconscious 
As is the Brown Malay 
Of Pearls in Eastern WaterSj 
Marked His -What Holiday 

Would stir his slow conception - 
Had he the power to dream 
That but the Dower's fraction - 
Awaited even - Him - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 26 (H 48d). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 73. 



425 

Good Morning- Midnight - 
I'm coming Home- 
Day -got tired of Me- 
How could I -of Him? 

Sunshine was a sweet place - 
I liked to stay- 

But Morn-did'nt want me- now 
So - Goodnight - Day! 

I can look -cant I- 
When the East is Red? 
The Hills -have a way- then - 
That puts the Heart -abroad- 

You -are not so fair -Midnight 
I chose -Day - 

But -please take a little Girl- 
He turned away! 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 164. 

[3*9] 



426 

It dont sound so terrible -quite -as it did- 
I run it over -"Dead", Brain, "Dead." 
Put it in Latin -left of my school - 
Seems it dont shriek so -under rule. 

Turn it, a little -full in the face 

A Trouble looks bitterest - 

Shift it- just - 

Say 'When Tomorrow comes this way- 

I shall have waded down one Day". 

I suppose it will interrupt me some 
Till I get accustomed -but then the /Tomb 
Like other new Things -shows largest - then - 
And smaller, by Habit - 

It's shrewder then 

Put the Thought in advance -a Year- 

How like "a fit"- then - 

Murder -wear! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H i44c). The poem was 
written almost certainly on the occasion of the death of Lieutenant Frazar 
A. Stearns, the promising twenty-one-year-old son of President Stearns of 
Amherst. The first student to enlist, Frazar was killed in action, 14 March 
1862. His funeral in Amherst on 22 March was especially solemn. Writing 
to Samuel Bowles at the time (Letters, ed. 1931, 193-194), ED speaks of 
his death in words which she echoes in the poem: 

Austin is chilled by Frazer's murder. He says his brain keeps saying 
over "Frazer is killed" - "Frazer is killed," just as father told it to him. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 306. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. It is arranged as three stanzas of 4, 4, and 6 lines. 



[330] 



427 

I'll clutch -and clutch- 
Next- One -Might be the golden touch - 
Could take it- 
Diamonds - Wait - 
I'm diving -just a little late- 
But stars -go slow -for night - 

I'll string you -in fine Necklace - 

Tiaras - make - of some - 

Wear you on Hem- 

Loop up a Countess -with you- 

Make-a Diadem -and mend my old One- 

CounL- Hoard -then lose- 

And doubt that you are mine - 

To have the joy of feeling it - again - 

I'll show you at the Court - 
Bear you -for Ornament 
Where Women breathe - 
That every sigh - may lift you 
Just as high -as I- 

And-when I die- 

In meek array - display you - 

Still to show -how rich I go- 

Lest Skies impeach a wealth so wonderful - 

And banish me - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H 1453). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), iio-m. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 

428 

Taking up the fair Ideal, 

Just to cast her down 

When a fracture -we discover - 

Or a splintered Crown - [no stanza break] 



Makes the Heavens portable - 

And the Gods -a lie - 

Doubtless- "Adam" -scowled at Eden- 

For his perjury! 

Cherishing -our poor Ideal - 
Till in purer dress - 
We behold her - glorified - 
Comforts -search -like this- 
Till the broken creatures - 
We adored -for whole - 
Stains -all washed - 
Transfigured - mended - 
Meet us -with a smile - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H i45b). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 221. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. It is arranged as four quatrains. 

429 

The Moon is distant from the Sea- 
And yet, with Amber Hands - 
She leads Him -docile as a Boy- 
Along appointed Sands - 

He never misses a Degree - 
Obedient to Her Eye 
He comes just so far -toward the Town- 
Just so far -goes away- 

Oh, Signor, Thine, the Amber Hand- 
And mine -the distant Sea- 
Obedient to the least command 
Thine eye impose on me- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H i45c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (iSpi)* 104. One word is altered: 

12. eye] eyes 
[33] 



430 

It would never be Common more I said 
Difference - had begun - 
Many a bitterness had been 
But that old sort -was done- 

Or - if it sometime - showed - as 'twill - 
Upon the Downiest - Morn - 
Such bliss had I for all the years 
'Twould give an Easier pain 

Fd so much joy I told it Red 
Upon my simple Cheek - 
I felt it publish in my Eye 
'Twas needless any speak 

I walked as wings my body bore 
The feet I former used 
Unnescessary now to me 
As boots would be to Birds - 

I put my pleasure all abroad - 
I dealt a word of Gold 
To every Creature that I met- 
And Dowered -all the World - 

When - suddenly - my Riches shrank - 
A Goblin drank my Dew 
My Palaces - dropped tenantless- 
Myself - was beggared - too - 

I clutched at sounds - 

I groped at shapes 

I touched the tops of Films - 

I felt the Wilderness roll back 

Along my Golden lines - 



[3331 



The Sackcloth - hangs upon the nail- 
fThe Frock I used to wear- 



iut where my moment of Brocade - 
My -drop -of India? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H i46a). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 98-99. The text is arranged as eight quat- 
rains. Four words are altered: 

5. sometime] sometimes 19. To] For 

13. my] of 25. sounds] sands 



431 

Me - come! My dazzled face 
In such a shining place! 
Me -hear! My foreign Ear 
The sounds of Welcome -there! 

The Saints forget 
Our bashful feet- 

My Holiday, shall be 

That They -remember me- 

My Paradise -the fame 

That They -pronounce my name- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H i46b). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 164. It is printed as five two-line stanzas. 
Two alterations are made: 

4. there] near 5. forget] shall meet 



43* 

Do People moulder equally, 
They bury, in the Grave? 
[ do believe a Species 
As positively live 

[334] 



As I, who testify it 

Deny that I -am dead- 

And fill my Lungs, for Witness - 

From Tanks -above my Head- 

I say to you, said Jesus - 

That there be standing here - 

A Sort, that shall not taste of Death - 

If Jesus was sincere - 

I need no further Argue - 
The statement of the Lord 
Is not a controvertible ~ 
He told me, Death was dead- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 27 (H i46c). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 207. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



433 

Knows how to forget! 
But -could she teach -it"? 
Tis the Art, most of all, 
I should like to know- 

Long, at it's Greek - 
I -who pored - patient 
Rise -still the Dunce - 

Gods used to know- 

/ 

Mould my slow mind to this Comprehension - 
Oddest of sciences -Book ever bore- 

How to forget! 
Ah, to attain it- 
I would give you- 
All other Lore - 

earlier version 

[335] 



Knows how to forget! 
But could It teach it? 
Easiest of Arts, they say 
When one learn how 

Dull Hearts have died 
In the Acquisition 
Sacrifice for Science 
Is common, though, now- 

I went to School 
But was not wiser 
Globe did not teach it 
Nor Logarithm Show 

"How to forget"! 
Say - some - Philosopher! 
Ah, to be erudite 
Enough to know! 

Is it in a Book? 
So, I could buy it- 
Is it like a Planet? 
Telescopes would know- 

If it be invention 
It must have a Patent. 
Rabbi of the Wise Book 
Dont you know? 

later version 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two. The earlier version, written about 1862, 
is in packet 27 (H 147). The later version, written about 1865, is in packet 
90 (Bingham 63b). Both versions are fair copies of completed poems. 

PUBLICATION: The earlier version is in BM (1945), 305, among un- 
finished poems. It reproduces a transcript made by a copyist for Mrs. Todd 
in the late i88o's of the copy in packet 27. The third stanza is printed as 
a quatrain. Three words are altered: 

8. Gods] God 14. Lore] love 

10. bore] con 

[336] 



The later version is in BM, 116-117. It reproduces the text of the copy in 
packet 90. 



434 

To love thee Year by Year- 

May less appear 

Than sacrifice, and cease - 

However, dear, 

Forever might be short, I thought to show- 

And so I pieced it, with a flower, now. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 28 (H i5ib). 
PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 131. The last four words of line 5 are 
printed as a separate line. 

435 

Much Madness is divinest Sense - 
To a discerning Eye- 
Much Sense -the starkest Madness- 
'Tis the Majority 
In this, as All, prevail - 
Assent -and you are sane- 
Demur - you're straightway dangerous - 
And handled with a Chain - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 28 (H i5id). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 24. One word is altered: 

5. prevail] prevails 



436 

The Wind -tapped like a tired Man- 
And like a Host -"Come in" 
I boldly answered -entered then 
My Residence within 

[337] 



A Rapid - footless Guest - 
To offer whom a Chair 
Were as impossible as hand 
A Sofa to the Air- 

No Bone had He to bind Him- 
His Speech was like the Push 
Of numerous Humming Birds at once 
From a superior Bush - 

His Countenance - a Billow 
His Fingers, as He passed 
Let go a music -as of tunes 
Blown tremulous in Glass- , 

; 

He visited -still flitting - 

Then like a timid Man 

Again, He tapped -'twas flurriedly- 

And I became alone - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 28 (H 1523). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 150-151, tided "The Wind's Visit" 
One line is altered: 

14. as he passed] if he pass 



437 

Prayer is the little implement 
Through which Men reach 
Where Presence -is denied them. 
They fling their Speech 

By means of it -in God's Ear 
If then He hear- 
This sums the Apparatus 
Comprised in Prayer 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 18 (H 1520). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 82, titled "Prayer." 

[3381 



438 

Forget! The lady with the Amulet 
Forgot she wore it at her Heart 
Because she breathed against 
Was Treason twixt? 

Deny! Did Rose her Bee- 

For Privilege p Play 

Or Wile of Butterfly 

Or Opportunity - Her Lord away? 

The lady with the Amulet -will fade 
The Bee -in Mausoleum laid- 
Discard his Bride - 
But longer than the little Rill- 
That cooled the Forehead of the Hill 
While Other -went the Sea to fill- 
And Other -went to turn the Mill- 
ril do thy Will- 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 28 (H 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 103. The text is arranged as four quatrains. 
Two words are altered: 

2. Forgot] Forget 7. Wile] will 



439 

Undue Significance a starving man attaches 
To Food- 

Far off -He sighs -and therefore - Hopeless - 
And therefore- Good - 

Partaken -it relieves- indeed - 

But proves us 

That Spices fly 

In the Receipt -It was the Distance - 

Was Savory- 

[339] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 28 (H 1530). 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 70. The text is arranged as two quatrains. 



440 

'Tis customary as we part 
A trinket - to confer - 
It helps to stimulate the faith 
When Lovers be afar- 

'Tis various - as the various taste - 
Clematis - journeying far- 
Presents me with a single Curl 
Of her Electric Hair- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 28 (H i54b). One name for 
clematis is "Traveler's Joy." It is possible this poem was composed to ac- 
company the gift of a clematis blossom for a departing friend. 

PUBLICATION: EM (1945), 78. The text derives from a transcript made 
by Mrs. Todd. 



441 

This is my letter to the World 
That never wrote to Me - 
The simple News that Nature told- 
With tender Majesty 

Her Message is committed 

To Hands I cannot see- 

For love of Her -Sweet -countrymen - 

Judge tenderly -of Me 

MANUSCRIPT: Early 1862, in packet 29 (H 7ob). 

PUBLICATION: This is one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393. The text is identical with that in Poems 
(1890), where it occupies a separate leaf placed between the last page of 
the table of contents and the page that opens the first section. 



44* 

God made a little Gentian - 

It tried - to be a Rose - 

And failed -and all the Summer laughed - 

But just before the Snows 

There rose a Purple Creature - 
That ravished all the Hill- 
And Summer hid her Forehead - 
And Mockery -was still - 

The Frosts were her condition - 
The Tyrian would not come 
Until the North -invoke it- 
Creator - Shall I - bloom? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 29 (H yoc). 

PUBLICATION: Independent, XLIII (5 Feb. 1891), i, titled "Fringed 
Gentian"; Poems (1891), 172, titled "Fringed Gentian." It is without stanza 
division. Two words are altered: 

5. rose] came n. invoke] evoked 



443 

I tie my Hat - 1 crease my Shawl - 
Life's little duties do - precisely - 
As the very least 
Were infinite -to me- 

I put new Blossoms in the Glass - 

And throw the old- away - 

I push a petal from my Gown 

That anchored there - 1 weigh 

The time 'twill be till six o'clock 

I have so much to do- 

And yet - Existence - some way back- 

Stopped - struck - my ticking - through - 

We cannot put Ourself away [no stanza break] 

[34i] 



As a completed Man 

Or Woman -When the Errand's done 

We came to Flesh- upon - 

There may be -Miles on Miles of Nought - 

Of Action - sicker far- 

To simulate -is stinging work- 

To cover what we are 

From Science -and from Surgery - 

Too Telescopic Eyes 

To bear on us unshaded - 

For their -sake -not for Our's- 

Twould start them - 

We -could tremble - 

But since we got a Bomb - 

And held it in our Bosom - 

Nay -Hold it -it is calm- 



Therefore- we do life's labor - 
Though life's Reward -be done- 
With scrupulous exactness - 
To hold our Senses - on - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 29 (H 193). In line 10, over the 
words "I," "so," and "to," ED has written "2," "i," "3," respectively, as 
though suggesting the line read: "So much I have to do." 

PUBLICATION: Sometime after ED's death the two sheets on which this 
poem had been written became separated and were assigned to different 
packets. Thus when the poem was first published in FP (1929), 180, it 
lacked the final nine lines which are on the second sheet. Since the poem 
is there printed as six quatrains, it might be said that stanzas 7 and 8 are 
wanting. What happened is that the sheet containing the first six quatrains 
was moved to packet 5. This transfer left the last two quatrains facing 
(and apparently concluding) "A still - Volcano - Life." This latter poem 
was also first published in FP, and Mrs. Bianchi concluded it with the 
final quatrain of "I tie my Hat", at the same time omitting the preceding 
quatrain. The displaced sheet containing the first six quatrains of "I tie 
my Hat" clearly belongs in packet 29. The stationery corresponds exactly 

[34*] 



in paper type and measurements to the sheets in packet 29. The pinholes 
in the spine, where the sheets were originally threaded together, also match 
exactly. These correspondences are all lacking for the sheets that make 
up packet 5. Corroborative evidence of the transfer is in the fact that Mrs. 
Bingham published the last nine lines, arranged as two quatrains, as the 
two final stanzas of "I tie my Hat" in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 
34-35, from a transcript made by her mother. Thus at the time Mrs. Todd 
saw the manuscript, the two sheets were in their correct order in packet 29. 
To summarize: The first twenty-four lines were first published in FP as 
the final stanza of "A still -Volcano -Life/' The final nine lines, arranged 
as two quatrains, are in NEQ, with attention drawn to the fact that they 
conclude "I tie my Hat" and that the first of the two quatrains had not pre- 
viously been published. The line of separation before the final quatrain 
is not retained. In FP, line 10 does not adopt the suggested change of word 
order; in NEQ it does. Two words, altered in FP, are corrected in NEQ: 

ii. Yet] get 13. Ourself] ourselves 



444 

It feels a shame to be Alive - 
When Men so brave - are dead - 
One envies the Distinguished Dust- 
Permitted - such a Head- 

The Stone -that tells defending Whom 
This Spartan put away 
What little of Him we -possessed 
In Pawn for Liberty - 

The price is great -Sublimely paid- 
Do we deserve -a Thing - 
That lives -like Dollars - must be piled 
Before we may obtain? 

Are we that wait -sufficient worth - 
That such Enormous Pearl 
As life -dissolved be -for Us- 
In Battle's -horrid Bowl? 

[343] 



It may be -a Renown to live- 
I think the Men who die- 
Those unsustained - Saviors - 
Present Divinity - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 29 (H i58b). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 94. Line 15 is altered to read: "As Life 
should be dissolved for us". The text, originally arranged as stanzas of 
6, 6, 6, 6, 5 lines, was restored to quatrains in later collections. 



445 

Twas just this time, last year, I died. 
I know I heard the Corn, 
When I was carried by the Farms - 
It had the Tassels on - 

I thought how yellow it would look - 
When Richard went to mill- 
And then, I wanted to get out, 
But something held my will. 

I thought just how Red - Apples wedged 
The Stubble's joints between - 
And Carts went stooping round the fields 
To take the Pumpkins in- 

I wondered which would miss me, least, 
And when Thanksgiving, came, 
If Fathered multiply the plates - 
To make an even Sum- 

And would it blur the Christmas glee 
My Stocking hang too high 
For any Santa Claus to reach 
The Altitude of me- 

But this sort, grieved myself, 
And so, I thought the other way, 

r T [no stanza 'break] 

[ 3441 



How just this time, some perfect year- 
Themself, should come to me- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 32 (H 6ia). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 198-199, titled "Retrospect." The last 
two stanzas are altered to read: 

And if my stocking hung too high 

Would it blur the Christmas glee, 
That not a Santa Glaus could reach 

The altitude of me? 

But this sort grieved myself, and so 

I thought how it would be 
When just this time, some perfect year, 

Themselves should come to me. 



446 

I showed her Hights she never saw- 

"Would'st Climb," I said? 

She said -"Not so" - 

"With me-" I said -With me> 

I showed her Secrets - Morning's Nest- 

The Rope the Nights were put across - 

And now - "Would'st have me for a Guest?" 

She could not find her Yes- 

And then, I brake my life -And Lo, 

A Light, for her, did solemn glow, 

The larger, as her face withdrew - 

And could she, further, "No"? 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written about 1862. The copy re- 
produced above (H 276), signed "Emily- ," was sent to Sue. It is a variant 
of the copy below (H 6ic) in packet 32, which is incomplete; pin holes 
at the bottom of the sheet where it breaks off suggest that it was finished 
on a scrap now missing. The text of the three final lines is a reconstruction. 

He showed me Hights I never saw- 

"Would'st Climb" -He said? 

I said, "Not so." 

"With me" -He said- 'With me>" 

[345] 



He showed me secrets - Morning's nest- 
The Rope the Nights were put across - 
"And now, Would'st have me for a Guest?" 
I could not find my 'Tes"- 

And then -He brake His Life -and lo, 
[A Light, for me, did solemn glow, 
The larger, as my face withdrew - 
And could I, further, "No' 1 ?] 

PUBLICATION: SH (1914), 132. It derives from the variant to Sue. 
Only now (line 7) is italicized. One word is altered: 

6. the Nights] that Nights 



447 

Could -I do more -for Thee- 
Wert Thou a Bumble Bee- 
Since for the Queen, have I- 
Nought but Boquet? 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 73. 



448 

This was a Poet -It is That 
Distills amazing sense 
From ordinary Meanings - 
And Attar so immense 

From the familiar species 
That perished by the Door- 
We wonder it was not Ourselves 
Arrested it- before - 

Of Pictures, the Discloser- 
The Poet-it is He- 
Entitles Us -by Contrast- 
To ceaseless Poverty- 

[346] 



Of Portion -so unconscious - 
The Robbing -could not harm- 
Himself-to Him -a Fortune - 
Exterior -to Time- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H 1833). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 12. The first eight lines are arranged as an 
eleven-line stanza. In the Centenary edition (1930) and later collections 
they are arranged as an eight-line stanza. One word is altered: 

4. Attar] attars 



449 

I died for Beauty -but was scarce 
Adjusted in the Tomb 
When One who died for Truth, was lain 
In an adjoining Room- 

He questioned softly "Why I failed"? 
"For Beauty ', I replied - 
"And I -for Truth -Themself are One- 
We Bretheren, are", He said- 

And so, as Kinsmen, met a Night - 
We talked between the Rooms - 
Until the Moss had reached our lips - 
And covered up - our names - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H 1830. 

PUBLICATION: This was one of fourteen poems selected for publication 
in an article contributed by T. W. Higginson to the Christian Union, 
XLII (25 September 1890), 393, titled 'Two Kinsmen/' The text is identi- 
cal with that in Poems (1890), 1 19. One word is altered: 

7. Themself] the two 



[347] 



450 

Dreams -are well -but Waking's better, 
If One wake at Morn - 
If One wake at Midnight -better- 
Dreaming -of the Dawn- 

Sweeter-the Surmising Robins - 
Never gladdened Tree- 
Than a Solid Dawn -confronting - 
Leading to no Day- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H 
PUBLICATION: L7P (1935), 77. One word is altered: 
2. wake] wakes 



451 

The Outer -from the Inner 
Derives it's Magnitude - 
Tis Duke, or Dwarf, according 
As is the Central Mood- 

The fine -unvarying Axis 

That regulates the Wheel - 

Though Spokes -spin -more conspicuous 

And fling a dust -the while. 

The Inner -paints the Outer - 
The Brush without the Hand- 
It's Picture publishes- precise - 
As is the inner Brand - 

On fine -Arterial Canvas- 
A Cheek -perchance a Brow- 
The Star's whole Secret -in the Lake- 
Eyes were not meant to know. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H 1843). 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 69. "Star's" (line 15) is rendered "stars'." 

[348] 



452 

The Malay -took the Pearl - 
Not- 1 -the Earl- 
I- feared the Sea -too much 
Unsanctified - to touch - 

Praying that I might be 
Worthy -the Destiny - 
The Swarthy fellow swam- 
And bore my Jewel - Home - 

Home to the Hut! What lot 
Had I -the Jewel- got - 
Borne on a Dusky Breast - 
I had not deemed a Vest 
Of Amber -fit - 

The Negro never knew 
I -wooed it- too - 
To gain, or be undone - 
Alike to Him- One - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H 1840. The poem may 
have been inspired by Browning's Paracelsus. The concluding lines of the 
protagonist in part one ("Paracelsus Aspires") read: 

Are there not, Festus, are there not, dear Michal, 
Two points in the adventure of the diver, 
One when, a beggar, he prepares to plunge, 
One when, a prince, he rises with his pearl? 
Festus, I plunge! 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 131. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd. 



[349] 



453 

Love - thou art high - 

I cannot climb thee- 

But, were it Two- 

Who knows but we- 

Taking turns -at the Chimborazo- 

Ducal-at last -stand up by thee- 

Love - thou art deep - 

I cannot cross thee - 

But, were there Two 

Instead of One- 

Rower, and Yacht -some sovreign Summer - 

Who knows -but we'd reach the Sun? 

Love -thou art Vailed - 

A few -behold thee- 

Smile and alter -and prattle -and die- 

Bliss - were an Oddity - without thee - 

Nicknamed by God - 

Eternity - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H i84d and 185). Chim- 
borazo, in Ecuador, is one of the highest peaks of the Andes. 

PUBLICATION: London Mercury, XIX (February 1929), 355; FP 
(1929), 145. The text, arranged as three stanzas of 7, 8, and 8 lines, is 
restored to stanzas of six lines in later collections. The second "and" in 
line 15 is omitted in later collections. 



454 

It was given to me by the Gods - 

When I was a little Girl - 

They give us Presents most -you know- 

When we are new -and small. 

I kept it in my Hand - 

I never put it down - 

I did not dare to eat - or sleep - [no stanza 'break} 

[350] 



For fear it would be gone - 
I heard such words as "Rich"- 
When hurrying to school - 
From lips at Corners of the Streets - 
And wrestled with a smile. 
Rich! 'Twas Myself -was rich- 
To take the name of Gold- 
And Gold to own - in solid Bars - 
The Difference - made me bold - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 34 (H i86c and 187). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 83-84. The text, which derives from a 
transcript made by Mrs. Todd, is arranged as four quatrains. 

455 

Triumph - may be of several kinds - 
There's Triumph in the Room 
When that Old Imperator- Death - 
By Faith - be overcome - 

There's Triumph of the finer Mind 
When Truth -affronted long- 
Advance unmoved -to Her Supreme - 
Her God -Her only Throng - 

A Triumph -when Temptation's Bribe 
Be slowly handed back- 
One eye upon the Heaven renounced - 
And One - upon the Rack - 

Severer Triumph -by Himself 
Experienced -who pass 
Acquitted -from that Naked Bar- 
Jehovah's Countenance - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 2143). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 199, titled 'Triumph." Four words arc 
altered: 



4* be] is 10. Be] Is 

7. Advance unmoved] Advances calm 

Line 14 adds a word not in the manuscript: 

Experienced, who can pass 

The first line of the text is correctly rendered in Poems (1891). In subse- 
quent collections it is altered to read: 

A triumph may be of several kinds. 

456 

So well that I can live without - 

I love thee - then How well is that? 

As well as Jesus? 

Prove it me 

That He - loved Men - 

As I -love thee- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 2140. 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 168. The text is printed as a seven-line 
stanza by dividing line 2 into two lines. 

457 

Sweet - safe - Houses - 

Glad - gay - Houses - 

Sealed so stately tight - 

Lids of Steel -on Lids of Marble - 

Locking Bare feet out- 

Brooks of Plush -in Banks of Satin 
Not so softly fall 

As the laughter -and the whisper - 
From their People Pearl - 

No Bald Death -affront their Parlors - 
No Bold Sickness come 
To deface their Stately Treasures - 
Anguish - and the Tomb - 



Hum by -in Muffled Coaches - 
Lest they- wonder Why- 
Any -for the Press of Smiling - 
Interrupt -to die- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 21 5a). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 203. The text derives from a transcript 
made by Mrs. Todd, and is arranged as four quatrains. 



458 

Like Eyes that looked on Wastes - 
Incredulous of Ought 
But Blank - and steady Wilderness - 
Diversified by Night - 

Just Infinites of Nought - 

As far as it could see- 

So looked the face I looked upon - 

So looked itself -on Me- 

I offered it no Help - 
Because the Cause was Mine - 
The Misery a Compact 
As hopeless -as divine - 

Neither -would be absolved - 
Neither would be a Queen 
Without the Other - Therefore - 
We perish - tho' We reign - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 2i7c). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), in. The text derives from a transcript of 
the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. Two words are altered: 

3. steady] stead 5. Infinites] infinite 

[353] 



459 

A Tooth upon Our Peace 
The Peace cannot deface- 
Then Wherefore be the Tooth? 
To vitalize the Grace - 

The Heaven hath a Hell- 
Itself to signalize - 
And every sign before the Place 
[s Gilt with Sacrifice - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H iiyd). In line 6, "signal- 
ize" is marked for an alternate, but none is given. 

PUBLICATION: Saturday Review of Literature, XIII (9 November 
1935), 12; UP (1935), ii. 



460 

I know where Wells grow - Droughtless Wells - 
Deep dug - for Summer days - 
Where Mosses go no more away - 
And Pebble -safely plays - 

It's made of Fathoms -and a Belt- 
A Belt of jagged Stone - 
Inlaid with Emerald - half way down - 
And Diamonds -jumbled on- 

It has no Bucket - Were I rich 
A Bucket I would buy- 
I'm often thirsty -but my lips 
Are so high up -You see- 

I read in an Old fashioned Book 
That People "thirst no more" - 
The Wells have Buckets to them there - 
It must mean that -Fin sure- 

[354] 



Shall We remember Parching -then? 
Those Waters sound so grand - 
I think a little Well -like Mine- 
Dearer to understand - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 2i8a). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 53. There are two alterations: 

5. It's] They're 9. It has] They have 

461 

A Wife -at Daybreak I shall be- 
Sunrise - Hast thou a Flag for me? 
At Midnight, I am but a Maid, 
How short it takes to make it Bride - 
Then - Midnight, I have passed from thee 
Unto the East, and Victory - 

Midnight -Good Night! I hear them call, 
The Angels bustle in the Hall- 
Softly my Future climBs the Stair, 
I fumble at my Childhood's prayer 
So soon to be a Child no more- 
Eternity, I'm coming -Sir, 
Savior -I've seen the face -before! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are three, all written about 1862. The fair copy 
reproduced above (Bingham 98-46-4) may have been intended for or 
sent to a friend. The nature of the variants, discussed below, suggests that 
it is the latest of the three copies. The copy in packet 40 (H 2i9a) reads 
thus: 

A Wife -at Daybreak -I shall be- 

Sunrise - Hast thou a Flag for me? 

At Midnight -I am yet a Maid- 

How short it takes to make it Bride - 

Then -Midnight -I have passed from Thee- 

Unto the East -and Victory. 

Midnight -Good Night -I hear them Call- 

The Angels bustle in the Hall - [no stanza fcreafe] 

[355] 



Softly -my Future climbs the stair - 
I fumble at my Childhood's Prayer - 
So soon to be a Child -no more- 
Eternity -I'm coming -Sir- 
Master- I've seen the Face -before - 

Two words differ from those in the later copy: 

3. yet] but 13. Master] Savior 

The rough penciled draft (Bingham 103-1) from which the other copies 
derive is identical in text with the packet copy: 

A wife -at Daybreak I shall be- 
Sunrise - hast thou a flag for me? 
At midnight - 1 am yet a maid - 
How short it takes to make it Bride! 
Then - Midnight - 1 have passed from thee 
Unto the East -and Victory - 
Midnight - Good night -I hear them call- 
The Angels bustle in the hall- 
Softly-my Future climbs the stair - 
I fumble at my Childhood's prayer - 
So soon to be a Child -no more- 
Eternity-I'm coming -sir- 
Master- I've seen the face before - 

6. Unto] Over 

Although ED underlined her suggested change, she did not adopt it in 
the later copies. Line 12 was first written "The Vision flutters in the door," 
but she crossed it out and substituted the present line. 

PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIII (March, 1929), 332; FP 
(1929), 190. The text derives from the packet copy. Line 7 is arranged as 
two lines. One word is altered: 

13. the] that 



462 

Why make it doubt -it hurts it so- 

So sick -to guess - 

So strong - to know - 

So brave -upon it's little Bed [no stanza break] 

[356] 



To tell the very last They said 
Unto Itself -and smile -And shake-' 
For that dear - distant - dangerous - Sake - 
But -the Instead -the Pinching fear 
That Something -it did do -or dare- 
Offend the Vision - and it flee - 
And They no more remember me - 
Nor ever turn to tell me why- 
Oh, Master, This is Misery- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 2i9b). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 107. Line 8 is arranged as two lines. 

463 

I live with Him - 1 see His face - 
I go no more away 
For Visiter - or Sundown - 
Death's single privacy 

The Only One - forestalling Mine- 
And that -by Right that He 
Presents a Claim invisible - 
No Wedlock -granted Me- 

I live with Him - 1 hear His Voice - 
I stand alive- Today - 
To witness to the Certainty 
Of Immortality - 

Taught Me -by Time -the lower Way- 
Conviction - Every day- 
That Life like This -is stopless- 
Be Judgment -what it may- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 2190. 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 94, tided "Numen Lumen/' One word 
is altered: 

15. stopless] endless 

[357] 



464 

The power to be true to You, 
Until upon my face 
The Judgment push His Picture - 
Presumptuous of Your Place - 

Of This -Could Man deprive Me- 
Himself-the Heaven excel - 
Whose invitation-Your's reduced 
Until it showed too small - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 40 (H 2i9d). 

PUBLICATION: New York Herald Tribune Book Review, 10 March 
1929, page 4; FP (1929), 169. The stanza division is not retained. One 
word is altered: 

8. showed] shone 



465 

I heard a Fly buzz -when I died- 
The Stillness in the Room 
Was like the Stillness in the Air- 
Between the Heaves of Storm - 

The Eyes around -had wrung them dry- 
And Breaths were gathering firm 
For that last Onset -when the King 
Be witnessed -in the Room- 

I willed my Keepsakes - Signed away 
What portion of me be 
Assignable - and then it was 
There interposed a Fly- 

With Blue - uncertain stumbling Buzz- 
Between the light -and me- 
And then the Windows failed -and then 
I could not see to see - 

[358] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 84 (Bingham 2oc). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 184, titled "Dying/* Several words are 
altered: 

2. in the Room] round my form 8. the Room] his power 

5. around] beside 10. he] I 

6. firm] sure u] Could make assignable, and then 

The poem is correctly printed in AB (1945), 336-337. 

466 

"Tis little I -could care for Pearls - 
Who own the ample sea- 
^Or Brooches -when the Emperor - 
With Rubies- pel teth me- 

Or Gold - who am the Prince of Mines - 
Or Diamonds -when have I 
A Diadem to fit a Dome- 
Continual upon me- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 84 (Bingham 24b). "Emperor" 
(line 3) is marked for an alternate, but none is given. 

PUBLICATION: Outlook, LIH (25 January 1896), 140, tided "Suffi- 
ciency"; and Poems (1896), 13, titled "Real Riches." Alterations are made 
in two lines: 

6. have I] I see 8. upon] crowning 



467 

We do not play on Graves - 
Because there is'nt Room- 
Besides-it is'nt even -it slants 
And People come - 

And put a Flower on it- 

And hang their faces so- 

We're fearing that their Hearts will drop- 

And crush our pretty play- 

[359] 



And so we move as far 

As Enemies- away - 

Just looking round to see how far 

It is- Occasionally - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 84 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: EM (1945), 94, The last two words of line 3 are ar- 
ranged as the first two of line 4. 

468 

The Manner of it's Death 
When Certain it must die - 
'Tis deemed a privilege to choose - 
'Twas Major Andre's Way- 

When Choice of Life -is past- 
There yet remains a Love 
It's little Fate to stipulate - 

How small in those who live- 

f The Miracle to teaze 
With Babble of the styles - 
How "they are Dying mostly - now" - 
And Customs at "St. James"! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 84 (Bingham 25c). At the end of 
the first line ED wrote "to choose/' then crossed the words out. She may 
have intended line 8 to conclude the second stanza, but in the packet copy 
it is clearly separated. 

Major John Andres request that he be allowed a soldier's death by 
shooting was denied by Washington, and he was hanged as a spy. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 184. The text is arranged as three quatrains. 

469 

! The Red -Blaze -is the Morning - 
The Violet -is Noon- 
The Yellow - Day - is falling - 
And after that -is none- 



But Miles_of Sparks -at Evening - 
Reveal the Width that burned - 
The Territory Argent -that 
Never yet -consumed - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 84 (Bingham 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 27. The last word of line 7 is printed as 
the first of line 8. 

470 

I am alive -I guess - 
The Branches on my Hand 
Are full of Morning Glory - 
And at my finger's end 

The Carmine - tingles warm - 
And if I hold a Glass 
Across my Mouth -it blurs it- 
Physician's- proof of Breath - 

I am alive -because 

I am not in a Room - 

The Parlor -Commonly -it is- 

So Visitors may come - 

And lean - and view it sidewise - 
And add "How cold - it grew" - 
And 'Was it conscious -when it stepped 
In Immortality?" 

I am alive - because 
I do not own a House- 
En titled to myself -precise - 
And fitting no one else- 

And marked my Girlhood's name - 
So Visitors may know 
Which Door is mine - and not mistake - 
And try another Key- 

[361] 



How good -to be alive! 

How infinite -to be 

Alive -two-fold -The Birth I had- 

And this -besides, in -Thee! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 84 (Bingham 26b). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 140. 



A Night -there lay the Days between - 
The Day that was Before - 
And Day that was Behind -were one- 
And now -'twas Night -was here- 
Slow- Night -that must be watched away- 
As Grains upon a shore - 
Too imperceptible to note- 
Till it be night -no more- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 84 (Bingham 2yd). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 30. 



472 

Except the Heaven had come so near- 
So seemed to choose My Door- 
The Distance would not haunt me so- 
I had not hoped- before - 

But just to hear the Grace depart - 

T never thought to see- 
'Vfflicts me with a Double loss- 
Tis lost -And lost to me- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 9 (H 39c). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 54. 



473 

I am ashamed- 1 hide- 
What right have I - to be a Bride - 
So late a Dowerless Girl - 
Nowhere to hide my dazzled Face - 
No one to teach me that new Grace - 
Nor introduce my Soul- 

Me to adorn How - tell - 
Trinket -to make Me beautiful - 
Fabrics of Cashmere - 
Never a Gown of Dun- more - 
Raiment instead -of Pompadour - 
For Me -My soul -to wear- 

Fingers-to frame my Round Hair 

Oval - as Feudal Ladies wore - 

Far Fashions- Fair - 

Skill - to hold my Brow like an Earl - 

Plead -like a Whippowil- 

Prove-like a Pearl - 

Then, for Character - 

Fashion My Spirit quaint - white - 

Quick -like a Liquor - 

Gay -like Light - 

Bring Me my best Pride - 

No more ashamed - 

No more to hide- 

Meek - let it be - too proud - for Pride - 

Baptized -this Day -A Bride - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 9 (H 4ob). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 158-159. The text, originally arranged as 
four stanzas of 9, 6, 6, n lines, in later collections is arranged as five 
stanzas of 6, 6, 6, 6, 5 lines. One word is altered: 

20. white] while 

[363] 



474 

They put Us far apart - 
As separate as Sea 
And Her unsown Peninsula - 
We signified 'These see"- 

They took away our Eyes 
They thwarted Us with Guns - 
"I see Thee" each responded straight 
Through Telegraphic Signs -' 

X., 

With Dungeons -They devised- 
But through their thickest skill - 
And their opaquest Adamant - 
Our Souls saw - just as well - 

They summoned Us to die- 
With sweet alacrity 
We stood upon our stapled feet- 
Condemned-but just -to see- 

Permission to recant - 
Permission to forget 
We turned our backs upon the Sun 
For perjury of that 

Not Either -noticed Death - 
Of Paradise aware - 
Each other's Face - was all the Disc 
Each other's setting -saw - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 9 (H 423). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 100. One word is altered: 

1 6. just] first 



[364] 



475 

Doom is the House without the Door- 
Tis entered from the Sun- 
And then the Ladder's thrown away, 
Because Escape -is done- 

Tis varied by the Dream 

Of what they do outside - 

Where Squirrels play -and Berries die- 

And Hemlocks - bow - to God - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 9 (H 42c). 
PUBLICATION: Atlantic Monthly, CXLIII (March 1929), 329; FP 
(1929), 17. Two words are altered: 

7. Where] When 8. Hemlocks] hundreds 



47 6 

I meant to have but modest needs - 
Such as Con tent -and Heaven - 
Within my income - these could lie 
And Life and I - keep even - 

But since the last -included both- 
It would suffice my Prayer 
But just for One - to stipulate - 
And Grace would grant the Pair- 

And so -upon this wise -I prayed - 
Great Spirit -Give to me 
A Heaven not so large as Your's, 
But large enough -for me- 

\A Smile suffused Jehovah's face- 
The Cherubim - withdrew - 
Grave Saints stole out to look at me - 
And showed their dimples -too- 

[365] 



I left the Place, with all my might - 
I threw my Prayer away- 
The Quiet Ages picked it up- 
And Judgment -twinkled too - 
That one so honest -be extant - 
It take the Tale for true- 
That 'Whatsoever Ye shall ask- 
Itself be given You"- 

But I, grown shrewder -scan the Skies 
With a suspicious Air- 
As Children - swindled for the first 
All Swindlers -be- infer - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 9 (H 43b~44a). Stanza 5 is eight- 
line. 

PUBLICATION: Poems (1891), 34-35, titled "A Prayer/' The following 
alterations are made: 

1 8] My prayer away I threw 23. Ye] you 

22. It] As 

The text is arranged as seven quatrains. 



477 

No Man can compass a Despair - 
As round a Goalless Road 
No faster than a Mile at once 
The Traveller proceed - 

Unconscious of the Width - 
Unconscious that the Sun 
Be setting on His progress - 
So accurate the One 



At estimating Pain - 
Whose own -has just begun - 
His ignorance -the Angel 
That pilot Him along- 

1366] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 9 (H 44d). 

PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 141. It is here arranged as a single eleven- 
line stanza, with line 5 omitted. In AB (1945), 393-394, it is correctly 
printed as three quatrains, with line 5 restored; it here derives from a 
transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 



47 8 

I had no time to Hate - 

Because 

The Grave would hinder Me - 

And Life was not so 

Ample I 

Could finish- Enmity - 

Nor had I time to Love - 

But since 

Some Industry must be- 

The little Toil of Love- 

I thought 

Be large enough for Me- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet n (H 5ib). 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1890), 36. The lines are arranged as two quat- 
rains. One word is altered: 

12. Be] Was 



479 

She dealt her pretty words like Blades - 
How glittering they shone - 
And every One unbared a Nerve 
Or wantoned with a Bone - 

She never deemed - she hurt - 
That -is not Steel's Affair - 
A vulgar grimace in the Flesh - 
How ill the Creatures bear- 

[367] 



To Ache is human - not polite - 
The Film upon the eye 
Mortality's old Custom - 
Just locking up -to Die. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H 1043). 
PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 32. The text, arranged as stanzas of*6, 6, 
and 5 lines, in later collections is restored as quatrains. One word is altered: 

2. How] As 



480 

'Why do I love" You, Sir? 
Because - 

The Wind does not require the Grass 
To answer- Wherefore when He pass 
She cannot keep Her place. 

Because He knows -and 

Do not You- 

And We know not - 

Enough for Us 

The Wisdom it be so - 

The Lightning -never asked an Eye 

Wherefore it shut -when He was by 

Because He knows it cannot speak - 

And reasons not contained- 

- Of Talk - 

There be -preferred by Daintier Folk 

The Sunrise- Sir -compelleth Me- 
Because He's Sunrise -and I see- 
Theref ore - Then - 
I love Thee- 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H 

PUBLICATION: London Mercury, XIX (February 1929), 355-356; FP 

[368] 



(1929), I53- Stanzas 2 and 4 are omitted. The line spacings are arbitrarily 
altered. Three words are altered: 



i. You] thee 13. itl she 

12. it] she 



The four stanzas are in New England Quarterly, XX (1947), 34- The 
text is correctly rendered and derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd; 
it is arranged in four stanzas of 4, 3, 5, 3 lines. 



481 

The Himmaleh was known to stoop 
Unto the Daisy low- 
Transported with Compassion 
That such a Doll should grow 
Where Tent by Tent -Her Universe 
Hung out it's Flags of Snow- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H io4c). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 66. 



482 

We Cover Thee - Sweet Face - 
Not that We tire of Thee- 
But that Thyself fatigue of Us- 
Remember-as Thou go- 
We follow Thee until 
Thou notice Us -no more- 
And then -reluctant -turn away 
To Con Thee oer and oer- 

And blame the scanty love 
We were Content to show - 
Augmented -Sweet -a Hundred fold- 
If Thou would'st take it -now- 

[369] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H 
PUBLICATION: Poems (1896), 142. One word is altered: 

4. go! flee 
The text is arranged without stanza division. 

483 

A Solemn thing within the Soul 

To feel itself get ripe - 

And golden hang -while farther up- 

The Maker's Ladders stop- 

And in the Orchard far below - 

You hear a Being- drop - 

A Wonderful -to feel the Sun 
Still toiling at the Cheek 
You thought was finished - 
Cool of eye, and critical of Work- 
He shifts the stem -a little - 
To give your Core - a look - 

But solemnest - to know 
Your chance in Harvest moves 
A little nearer -Every Sun 
The Single -to some lives. 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H io6b). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 244. "Cool of eye" concludes line 9. The 
text derives from a transcript made by Mrs. Todd. 



484 

My Garden -like the Beach - 
Denotes there be -a Sea- 
That's Summer - 
Such as These -the Pearls 
She fetches -such as Me 

[37o] 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H io6d). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 59. It is arranged as a quatrain. 



485 

To make One's Toilette - after Death 
Has made the Toilette cool 
Of only Taste we cared to please 
Is difficult, and still - 

That's easier -than Braid the Hair- 
And make the Boddice gay- 
When eyes that fondled it are wrenched 
By Decalogues - away - 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H 1073). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 101. Line 3 is altered to read: 

To only taste we care to please 



486 

I was the slightest in the House - 
I took the smallest Room- 
At night, my little Lamp, and Book - 
And one Geranium - 

So stationed I could catch the Mint 
That never ceased to fall 
And just my Basket - 
Let me think -I'm sure 
That this was all- 

I never spoke -unless addressed 
And then, 'twas brief and low 
I could not bear to live aloud 
The Racket shamed me so- 



And if it had not been so far- 
And any one I knew 
Were going I had often thought 
How noteless -I could die- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H io7c). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 101. Stanza 2 is regularized into four lines. 
The text derives from a transcript of the packet copy made by Mrs. Todd. 



487 

You love the Lord -you cannot see 
You write Him -every day- 
A little note -when you awake - 
And further in the Day. 

An Ample Letter - How you miss - 
And would delight to see- 
But then His House -is but a Step 
And Mine's -in Heaven -You see. 



MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 219-220. The text derives from a tran- 
script made by Mrs. Todd. 



Myself was formed -a Carpenter - 
An unpretending time 
My Plane and I, together wrought 
Before a Builder came- 

To measure our attainments - 
Had we the Art of Boards 
Sufficiently developed He'd hire us 
At Halves - 

[37*1 



My Tools took Human- Faces - 
The Bench, where we had toiled - 
Against the Man- persuaded - 
We -Temples build -I said- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H io8a). 
PUBLICATION: UP (1935), 71. The last three words of line 7 are ar- 
ranged as the first three of line 8. One word is altered: 

3. Plane] plans 



489 

1 We pray - to Heaven - 
We prate -of Heaven - 
Relate -when Neighbors die- 
At what o'clock to Heaven - they fled - 
Who saw them -Wherefore fly? 

Is Heaven a Place -a Sky -a Tree? 
Location's narrow way is for Ourselves - 
Unto the Dead 
There's no Geography - 

But State -Endowal- Focus - 
Where - Omnipresence - fly? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 19 (H io8b). 

PUBLICATION: FP (1929), 48. The text is arranged as two stanzas 
of 6 and 5 lines; in later collections, as two stanzas of 5 and 5 lines. The 
two final lines are omitted. Line 6 is altered to read: 

Is Heaven a place, and Sky a face? 



490 

To One denied to drink 
To tell what Water is 
Would be acuter, would it not 
Than letting Him surmise? 

[373] 



To lead Him to the Well 

And let Him hear it drip 

Remind Him, would it not, somewhat 

Of His condemned lip? 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 88 (Bingham 49d). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 287. 

49 i 

While it is alive 

Until Death touches it 

While it and I lap one Air 

Dwell in one Blood 

Under one Sacrament 

Show me Division can split or pare - 

Love is like Life -merely longer 
Love is like Death, during the Grave 
Love is the Fellow of the Resurrection 
Scooping up the Dust and chanting "Live"! 

MANUSCRIPTS: There are two, both written early in 1862. The copy 
reproduced above is in packet 88 (Bingham 49c). The other variant copy, 
in packet 89 (Bingham 59b), is a semifinal draft: 

While "it" is alive - 

Until Death - touches it- 

While "it" and I - lap one - Air - 

Dwell in one Blood - 

Under one Firmament - 

Show me Division - could split -or pare! 

"Faith" -is like- life - 

Only, the longer - 

Faith -is like Death - 

During -the Grave - 

Faith -is the Fellow of the Resurrection, 

Scooping up the Dust and chanting - Live! 

5. Firmament] Sacrament 

6. could] can 

7. Faith] Love 

8. Only, the] Merely 

[3741 



In the redaction ED adopted all her suggested changes. The fair copy sub- 
stitutes "Love" for "Faith" likewise in lines 8 and 9. 

PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 178. The text derives from the fair copy, 
and is arranged as two quatrains. One word is altered: 

8. during] daring 



492 

Civilization -spurns -the Leopard! 

Was the Leopard -bold? 

Deserts -never rebuked her Satin - 

Ethiop-her Gold- 

Tawny -her Customs - 

She was Conscious - 

Spotted -her Dun Gown- 

This was the Leopard's nature - Signor - 

Need -a keeper -frown? 

Pity -the Pard-that left her Asia- 
Memories-of Palm- 
Cannot be stifled -with Narcotic - 
Nor suppressed -with Balm- 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 89 (Bingham 593). 
PUBLICATION: BM (1945), 273. The text is arranged as three quat- 
rains. 

493 

The World- stands -solemner- to me- 

Since I was wed -to Him- 

A modesty befits the soul 

That bears another 's- name - 

A doubt -if it be fair- indeed - 

To wear that perfect- pearl - 

The Man -upon the Woman- binds - 

To clasp her soul - for all - 

A prayer, that it more angel -prove - 

, , [no stanza break] 



A whiter Gif t- within - 

To that munificence, that chose - 

So unadorned a Queen - 

A Gratitude - that such be true- 

It had esteemed the Dream - 

Too beautiful -for Shape to prove - 

Or posture -to redeem! 

MANUSCRIPT: About 1862, in packet 89 (Bingham 59c). 
PUBLICATION: EM (1945), 150-151. 



494 

Going to Him! Happy letter! 

Tell Him- 

Tell Him the page I did'nt write - 

Tell Him - 1 only said the Syntax - 

And left the Verb and the pronoun out - 

Tell Him just how the fingers hurried - 

Then how they waded - slow - slow 

And then you wished you had eyes in your pages - 

So you could see what moved them so - 

Tell Him -it was'nt a Practised Writer - 
You guessed - from the way the sentence toiled - 
You could hear the Boddice tug, behind you - 
As if it held but the might of a child 
You almost pitied it you it worked so- 
Tell Him no you may quibble there 
For it would split His Heart, to know it - 
And then you and I, were silenter. 

Tell Him Night finished before we finished 
And the Old Clock kept neighing "Day"! 
And you -got sleepy -and begged to be ended - 
What could it hinder so -to say? 
Tell Him just how she sealed you - Cautious! 

r g , [no stanza break] 



But -if He ask where you are hid 

Until tomorrow -Happy letter! 

Gesture Coquette -and shake your Head! 

Version I 

Going -to -Her! 

Happy -Letter! Tell Her- 

Tell Her -the page I never wrote! 

Tell Her, I only said -the Syntax- 

And left the Verb and the Pronoun - out! 

Tell Her just how the fingers - hurried - 

Then -how they -stammered -slow- slow - 

And then - you wished you had eyes - in your pages - 

So you could see - what moved - them - so - 

Tell Her -it was'nt a practised writer - 

You guessed - 

From the way the sentence -toiled - 

You could hear the Boddice - tug - behind you - 

As if it held but the might of a child! 

You almost pitied - it - you - it worked so - 

Tell Her -No -you may quibble - there - 

For it would split Her Heart -to know it- 

And then -you and I -were silenter! 

Tell Her -Day -finished -before we- finished - 

And the old Clock kept neighing- "Day "! 

And you - got sleepy - and begged to be ended - 

What could - it hinder so - to say? 

Tell Her- just how she sealed -you -Cautious! 

But -if she ask "where you are hid" -until the evening - 

Ah! Be bashful! 

Gesture Coquette - 

And shake your Head! 

Version 11 

MANUSCRIPTS: Both these fair copies (Bingham 89-56 and 9&-4A-I 
respectively) were written about 1862. They are on embossed stationery, 

[3771 



both signed "Emily-," and have been folded as if enclosed in envelopes. 
There are variants in the text in addition to the change of pronouns: 

3. did'nt write] never wrote 24. tomorrow] the evening 

7. waded] stammered 25] Ah! Be bashful 

1 8. Night] Day 

PUBLICATION: Version I is in Poems (1891), 94-95> titled "The Letter." 
A third "slow" is added in line 6 (line 7 of the manuscript). The text is 
arranged as three eight-line stanzas. 



[378] 



